LRP1 at the crossroads of Aβ clearance and therapeutic targeting in Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD), characterized by progressive cognitive decline, memory impairment and behavioral disturbances, is the most common form of dementia, and no disease-modifying treatments are available to halt or slow its progression. Amyloid-beta (Aβ) is suggested to play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of AD, and enhancing the clearance of Aβ from the brain has emerged as a major research direction. As the primary receptor for Aβ clearance at the blood-brain barrier (BBB), low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) plays a crucial role in regulating Aβ transport and metabolism. Understanding the mechanisms through which LRP1 functions, as well as the factors that influence its activity is essential for enhancing Aβ clearance from the brain and developing targeted therapeutic strategies for Alzheimer’s disease. In this review, we introduce the transport of Aβ across the BBB, followed by a discussion of the basic structure and function of LRP1 and its role in AD progression. Then, we summarize factors affecting LRP1 function and current advances in LRP1-targeted therapies. Finally, we explore the potential of LRP1 as a therapeutic target for AD. So, LRP1 may be a central modulator of Aβ dynamics and a clinically actionable target for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease.

Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which is characterized by progressive cognitive decline, memory impairment and behavioral disturbances, is the most common form of dementia, accounting for 70–80% of all dementia cases. AD can be classified into familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD) and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease (SAD) based on genetic characteristics where FAD is primarily driven by mutations in genes such as APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2, while the pathogenesis of SAD involves complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors, with a significant influence from the pleiotropic effects of the APOE ε4 allele. Furthermore, AD exhibits phenotypic heterogeneity and can be categorized into early-onset AD (EOAD, onset age < 65 years) and late-onset AD (LOAD, onset age ≥ 65 years) in Clinical where EOAD is often associated with dominant genetic mutations, while LOAD is more influenced by metabolic dysfunction and vascular impairments.

Autopsy studies of AD patients revealed that amyloid plaques composed of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) formed by hyperphosphorylated tau protein are hallmark pathological features of the disease. Among the various hypotheses proposed for AD pathogenesis, the Aβ cascade hypothesis has dominated research for over three decades. According to this hypothesis, abnormal metabolism of amyloid precursor protein (APP) leads to excessive Aβ accumulation, which serves as a critical trigger in AD pathogenesis by inducing neuronal damage and neuroinflammation. In the brain, APP is a single-pass transmembrane protein concentrated in neuronal synapses, which is generated by brain neurons, blood vessels, blood cells, and a small number of astrocytes. Subsequently, APP is cleaved by two hydrolyses, including β-secretase extracellular and γ-secretase intracellular, to generate Aβ. whereas in a diseased state, APP undergoes abnormal cleavage by β-secretase, resulting in the release of a shorter ectodomain, sAPPβ (N-terminal fragment), and retention of C99 (C-terminal fragment) in the membrane. C99 is then further cleaved by γ-secretase, releasing the APP intracellular domain, and the soluble Aβ peptides further polymerize to form aggregated plaques. In the peripheral blood, platelets are the primary source of Aβ peptides and a large amount (more than 90%) of Aβ is derived from circulating platelets. More than 90% of blood Aβ40 and over 97% of blood Aβ42 are related to plasma lipoproteins in human. However, the causality between the levels of peripheral blood Aβ and its aggregation in the brain, particularly the role of the peripheral blood Aβ in the pathology of AD, is still unclear. Aβ further accelerates disease progression by initiating a toxic cascade involving tau pathology and neurodegeneration. However, a key contradiction that some individuals with Aβ deposition do not exhibit cognitive decline suggests that this hypothesis needs to integrate additional dimensions, such as tau pathology, neuroinflammation and metabolic imbalance to enhance its explanatory power. Some researchers also propose that vascular dysfunction plays a crucial role in Aβ accumulation and neurodegeneration, particularly through the disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB).

BBB represents a unique structure of the central nervous system (CNS), consisting of cerebral endothelial cells, perivascular mural cells (pericytes), glial cells (astrocytes and microglia) and neurons, continuous tight junctions (e.g., occludin and claudin)1—and adherence junctions (cadherins) between brain endothelial cells. BBB regulates Aβ transport between the plasma and brain via the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and facilitates Aβ clearance through cell surface receptors such as low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Studies indicate that the LRP1 is broadly expressed with clear and strong roles in neurons, astrocytes, and pericytes. Moreover, the LRP1is expressed mainly at the abluminal side of the BBB, plays a pivotal role in maintaining Aβ homeostasis in the CNS (Figure 1).

Structure and physiology of the BBB. BBB consists of cerebral endothelial cells, perivascular mural cells (pericytes), glial cells (astrocytes and microglia) and neurons, continuous tight junctions (e.g., occludin and claudin)1—and adherence junctions (cadherins) between brain endothelial cells. BBB regulates Aβ transport between the plasma and brain via RAGE and facilitates Aβ clearance through LRP1 and P-gp.(created by BioRender).

Studies indicate that the BBB clearance dysfunction is a major contributor to age-related declines in Aβ transportation. Aβ toxicity and metabolism have become central topics in AD research and therapeutic development because impaired Aβ clearance leads to its aggregation which is an initiating event in AD pathogenesis. Aβ clearance across the BBB primarily depends on receptor-mediated transport mechanisms, meaning that changes in receptor expression and function can directly impact Aβ clearance efficiency and lead to its accumulation. As LRP1 is the principal receptor involved in BBB-mediated Aβ clearance, investigating its expression levels and functional alterations is crucial for understanding AD pathogenesis. Additionally, targeting LRP1 for AD therapy holds great promise.

LRP1 structure and function

LRP1 was first identified in a screen for LDL receptor (LDLR) homologous sequences within the apoE domain in mouse lymphocytes and a human liver cDNA library. The LDLR family comprises major apoE receptors, including LDLR, LRP1, VLDLR and apoER2, each exhibiting different affinities for various apoE isoforms and lipidation states. Among these receptors, LRP1 is a type I transmembrane protein belonging to the LDLR family and is predominantly found in endothelial cells, vascular mural cells, neurons and astrocytes in neurovascular interface (Figure 2). It consists of two subunits: a 515 kDa α-chain (ligand-binding domain) and an 85 kDa β-chain (transmembrane signaling domain), which are generated through Furin-mediated cleavage and remain associated via noncovalent interactions. These two subunits work together to regulate ligand internalization and downstream signal transduction. Extracellularly, LRP1 contains four ligand-binding domains (I–IV), with domains II and IV being the primary binding sites. Additionally, its cytoplasmic tail includes two NPXY motifs and one YXXL motif, which play crucial roles in the receptor’s endocytic mechanisms.

The structure of LRP1 and sLRP1. (A) LRP1 is characterized by one or more ligand-binding domains, epidermal growth factor (EGF), homology domains consisting of EGF repeats and YWTD propeller domains involved in pH-dependent release of ligands in the endosomes, a single transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic tail containing at least one NPXY motif. (B) sLRP1 is produced by β-Secretase (BACE) proteolytic cleavage of the N-terminus extracellular domain of LRP1 (created by BioRender).

Aβ transports across BBB

Studies have shown that Aβ protein is present not only in the brains of AD patients but also in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma of healthy individuals, with CSF Aβ levels being approximately 10 times higher than those in plasma. Recent research further confirms that Aβ accumulation in the brains of AD patients primarily results from impaired clearance mechanisms rather than simply an increased rate of Aβ production, which underscores the central role of the clearance system in AD pathogenesis. Aβ is cleared from the brain through multiple pathways, including neuronal and glial uptake, transport across the BBB into circulation for systemic metabolism (e.g., in the liver and kidneys), enzymatic degradation, bulk flow clearance via interstitial fluid (ISF) and absorption into CSF. Studies have shown that LRP1-mediated clearance is significantly faster—up to six times more effective—than other pathways such as ISF flow or enzymatic degradation. Quantitative data indicate that LRP1 accounts for nearly 47.5% of Aβ1–42 clearance across the BBB and about 27% of total Aβ clearance, surpassing the efficiency of glymphatic and perivascular routes, which are slower and less specific. In addition, it is estimated that 40–60% of brain-derived Aβ is degraded through peripheral pathways outside the central nervous system. Among the key receptors involved in Aβ transport across brain cells and the BBB, LRP1 plays a pivotal role. Moreover, the affinity of Aβ protein for LRP1 is highly dependent on the aggregation state of Aβ. Studies indicates that fibrillar and oligomeric Aβ forms bind to LRP1 with much higher affinity compared to the monomeric form.

Furthermore, LRP1 can undergo cleavage by α- and β-secretases, generating a soluble circulating form known as sLRP1 which is the primary binding receptor for circulating Aβ and binds approximately 70% of plasma Aβ₁₋₄₀ and 90% of Aβ₁₋₄₂. However, compared to healthy controls, sLRP1 levels are significantly reduced and the oxidized form of sLRP1 is elevated by 2.8–3.7 times in AD patients, which has a markedly lower affinity for Aβ and leads to a 30–35% reduction in Aβ binding. Additionally, RAGE and P-gp are also critical for Aβ transport across the BBB. RAGE is a multi-ligand cell surface receptor primarily expressed in brain endothelial cells, facilitating Aβ transport from the extracellular surface into brain. P-gp, an ATP-dependent efflux transporter, is predominantly expressed in neurons, glial cells and endothelial cells, where it directly interacts with Aβ and pumps it from endothelial cells into the bloodstream. Moreover, a portion of extracellular Aβ in the brain may diffuse passively across the BBB into the bloodstream via paracellular pathways. In AD models, the expression levels of LRP1, P-gp and RAGE undergo significant changes, which may serve as initiating factors contributing to Aβ accumulation in the brain.

The role of LRP1 in Aβ and tau metabolism

LRP1 influences Aβ production

Studies have shown that the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain of LRP1 interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of APP to influence Aβ production. It was observed that long-term cell culture in the presence of receptor-associated protein (RAP) led to an increase in cell surface APP levels and a significant reduction in Aβ synthesis. Additionally, APP levels were reduced on the surface of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing LRP1, while APP accumulated on the surface of LRP1-deficient cells. In the brains of PDAPP mice, overexpression of LRP1 was found to increase soluble brain Aβ levels with age. One study demonstrated that LRP1 disruption in vivo shifted APP processing from amyloidogenic β-secretase cleavage, which generates Aβ, to non-amyloidogenic α-secretase cleavage, suggesting that LRP1 dysfunction might help reduce Aβ production. These findings indicate that LRP1 plays a role in APP processing and Aβ production. However, another study reported that in APP-transfected cells, LRP1 competed with APP for γ-secretase to reduce Aβ production. Furthermore, conditional deletion of LRP1 in vascular smooth muscle cells led to impaired cerebrovascular Aβ clearance and cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy (CAA)-like pathology, highlighting LRP1’s distinct role in Aβ drainage through the meningeal lymphatic system. These conflicting findings may be attributed to differences in cell types, experimental conditions and functional states of LRP1. Additionally, while some studies suggest that LRP1 overexpression increases Aβ levels, these results are primarily based on cell models. It has been well established that LRP1 expression declines with age in both human and mouse brains, with an even more pronounced reduction in AD. It suggests that findings from LRP1 overexpression models may not directly relate to AD pathology. Therefore, further investigations using diverse AD models are needed to clarify whether LRP1 promotes Aβ production.

LRP1 and Aβ clearance

Studies have shown that downregulation of LRP1 leads to net accumulation of Aβ in the brain, which exacerbates neurodegeneration and creates a positive feedback loop in AD pathology by activating the pro-inflammatory phenotype of microglia. Recent research has found that the loss of phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM) reduces Aβ clearance rates in mice and accelerates Aβ pathology. Additionally, deletion of LRP1 in vascular smooth muscle cells disrupts lysosome-mediated Aβ clearance along the cerebral vasculature, leading to exacerbated Aβ deposition, which suggests that LRP1 plays a role in localized Aβ degradation. In primary mouse astrocytes, knock outing LRP1 not only impairs Aβ uptake and degradation but also downregulates Aβ-degrading enzymes, indicating that LRP1 may influence extracellular Aβ metabolism as well.

LRP1 is highly expressed in multiple human organs, including the liver, brain, lungs, intestines and vascular system. When blood circulates through the liver, LRP1 clears 13.9% of Aβ₄₂ and 8.9% of Aβ₄₀ by mediating receptor endocytosis and lysosomal degradation, with Aβ metabolites being excreted into the intestines via bile ducts (Figure 3). Meanwhile, the kidneys primarily eliminate Aβ through glomerular filtration, and together, these organs help maintain peripheral Aβ homeostasis. According to the “peripheral sink” hypothesis, a dynamic equilibrium exists between peripheral and brain Aβ pools, where upregulating hepatic LRP1 levels enhances peripheral Aβ clearance, facilitating the removal of brain Aβ into the bloodstream via the BBB. Notably, plasma Aβ levels increase with age, suggesting an age-dependent decline in hepatic Aβ uptake. This indicates that liver dysfunction may contribute to Aβ accumulation in the brain and accelerate AD progression. LRP1 not only serves as the primary receptor for hepatic Aβ uptake from circulation but also functions as an Aβ clearance receptor in liver. Liver-specific overexpression of LRP1 has been shown to reduce brain Aβ burden by enhancing peripheral Aβ sequestration which also rescues synaptic plasticity deficits and spatial memory impairments in APP/PS1 mice, supporting the therapeutic potential of the peripheral sink hypothesis. Given LRP1’s pivotal role in Aβ clearance, developing therapeutic strategies to target LRP1 may offers promising avenues for AD treatment.

Schematic diagram illustrating the role of LRP1 and sLRP1 in a three-step process controlling clearance of brain Aβ. Step 1: Transcytosis of Aβ by LRP1 on the abluminal surface of brain endothelial cells, from brain to blood across the BBB. Step 2: Binding of plasma Aβ by sLRP1. Step 3: Clearance of systemic Aβ and sLRP1–Aβ complex by the liver and possibly the kidneys, in normal physiological conditions (A) and in AD (B). Ligand binding domains II and IV (green) bind Aβ (round orange). Oxidized (red) LRP1 or sLRP1 does not bind Aβ. (created by BioRender).

The role of LRP1 in tau pathology

Studies have shown that knocking out LRP1 significantly reduces tau uptake in glioblastoma cells and pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. In vivo, downregulation of LRP1 effectively limits tau propagation between neurons in a tau-spreading mouse model. However, given LRP1’s crucial role in Aβ clearance, inhibiting LRP1 to reduce tau spread may simultaneously impair Aβ clearance, necessitating careful evaluation of its therapeutic potential. Research indicates that the addition of oligomeric tau (TauO) to C6 cells downregulates LRP1 levels, while LRP1 expression is upregulated in heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG)-deficient cells, which suggests that surface HSPG influences LRP1-mediated tau uptake. Targeting HSPG may therefore provide a strategy to reduce tau internalization LRP1 also binds and processes monomeric tau, facilitating its degradation and promoting the seeding of pathological tau. Recent findings further suggest that TauO upregulates mitochondrial NADPH synthesis via NADK2, which affects LRP1-mediated TauO internalization. Additionally, LRP1 may participate in the gut-brain axis by mediating the trans-barrier transport of tau fibrils, highlighting the potential for gut microbiome modulation or intestine-specific LRP1 inhibition as a novel strategy to block tau pathology spread. Despite these findings, blocking LRP1 function to prevent tau propagation in the brain may not yield therapeutic benefits, as any potential advantages could be counteracted by network dysfunction and increased amyloid deposition. Thus, LRP1-targeted interventions require a nuanced approach to balance its effects on both tau and Aβ pathologies.

LRP1’s other metabolic functions

Beyond its role in Aβ and tau metabolism, LRP1 has multiple other functions. After its intracellular domain translocate to the nucleus, LRP1 can regulate gene transcription and expression, as well as serve as a scaffold for intracellular adaptor proteins. LRP1 also modulates various signaling pathways by interacting with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and the leptin/leptin receptor complex in the hypothalamus. Additionally, LRP1 plays a role in insulin signaling and glucose metabolism by interacting with insulin receptors and reducing the levels of glucose transporters GLUT3 and GLUT4 in neurons. Intravenous injection of an IGF1R/IR kinase inhibitor in wild-type mice significantly reduces LRP1 levels, highlighting its importance in insulin signaling. In diabetes, high glucose environments and experimental diabetic models reduce LRP1 expression and function at the BBB, lowering Aβ clearance and worsening cognitive impairment. In neurodegenerative diseases, LRP1 serves as a key regulator of α-synuclein uptake by neurons and is a crucial mediator of its spread in Parkinson’s disease. These findings underscore the diverse metabolic functions of LRP1, suggesting that its dysregulation may contribute to various pathological conditions and disease outcomes.

Factors affecting LRP1 function

Metabolic influence of APOE

As a key receptor in vivo, LRP1 function is influenced by multiple factors, where APOE is an essential one. LRP1-mediated Aβ transport across the BBB is regulated by APOE. Studies found that diet-related changes (notably high-fat diets) can further disturb the gut-brain-lipid axis, affecting BBB permeability and the expression/function of key proteins such as LRP1 and APOE. The polymorphic variants of APOE (ε2/ε3/ε4) significantly influence AD risk by modulating the stability and clearance efficiency of the Aβ-LRP1 complex. Gut microbiota composition and their metabolites (such as short-chain fatty acids and secondary bile acids) modulate APOE expression and its neuroprotective or pathological effect, such as APOE2 carriers often have a gut microbiome that supports neuroprotection through higher levels of beneficial metabolites, while APOE4 is linked to reduced neuroprotection, perturbed cholesterol homeostasis, and increased Aβ pathology. In EOAD patients carrying the APOE ε4 allele, CSF levels of phosphorylated tau181 (P-tau181) are higher than in LOAD patients. This could be one of the reasons why EOAD patients exhibit more severe memory and cognitive decline. Additionally, the ε4 allele differentially affects the relationship between tau and Aβ in EOAD and LOAD. As the most significant genetic risk factor for late-onset AD, APOE ε4 increases AD risk in the number of APOE ε4 alleles and lowers the age of onset. APOE4 also promotes early Aβ seeding through its neuron-specific interaction with LRP1. However, when APOE ε4 expression is reduced in ε4 carriers, overall APOE levels will increase and lead to lower Aβ accumulation in the brain.

APOE expression plays a crucial role in the endocytosis and transcytosis of Aβ-LRP1 complexes across the BBB. For example, studies show that human APOE transgenic mice clear Aβ more efficiently than APOE-knockout or wild-type mice. Moreover, compared to free Aβ, APOE-bound Aβ has a reduced clearance rate at the BBB in mice. APOE isoforms directly interact with LRP1 and may compete with Aβ for cellular clearance, thereby affecting brain Aβ clearance differently. Compared to apoE2- and apoE3-expressing mice, apoE4-expressing mice exhibit increased hippocampal Aβ deposition in APP/PS1 models. In addition, APOE2 carriers often have a gut microbiome that supports neuroprotection through higher levels of beneficial metabolites, while APOE4 is linked to reduced neuroprotection, perturbed cholesterol homeostasis. Dysbiosis can increase systemic inflammation and intestinal permeability and activation of inflammatory pathways (especially in APOE4 carriers) impairs LRP1-mediated Aβ clearance. Research indicates that the APOE4-Aβ complex is cleared not by LRP1 but by very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), while APOE2-Aβ and APOE3-Aβ complexes are cleared by both LRP1 and VLDLR at a faster internalization rate than APOE4-Aβ (Figure 4). Additionally, studies show that LRP1 exacerbates Aβ pathology in APOE ε4 carriers, while this effect is not observed in non-carriers and knocking out neuronal LRP1 will prevent APOE4-induced Aβ pathology. However, such a therapeutic approach might have severe pathological consequences, requiring further investigation.

APOE mediates Aβ-LRP1 complexes across the BBB. The gastrointestinal-brain axis (GBA) modulates the risk and progression of AD by integrating gut/liver-derived signals, systemic metabolism, and neuroinflammation, altering the function of APOE and LRP1 in lipid transport and Aβ clearance. APOE4-Aβ complex is cleared not by LRP1 but by very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), while APOE2-Aβ and APOE3-Aβ complexes are cleared by both LRP1 and VLDLR at a faster internalization rate than APOE4-Aβ (created by BioRender).

Genetic influence factors

LRP1 expression is also regulated by genetic factors. The transcriptional repressor SREBP2 negatively regulates LRP1 expression. Genes involved in vascular and metabolic functions can influence Aβ clearance in the central nervous system through SREBP2. For instance, defects in the SLC2A1 gene, which encodes GLUT1, lead to upregulation of the SREBP2 transcription factor, thereby reducing LRP1 expression. Additionally, overexpression of SRF/MYOCD in cerebral endothelial cells of AD patients significantly decreases LRP1 levels compared to age-matched healthy controls. MEOX2, a regulator of vascular differentiation and remodeling, is downregulated in AD and Low levels of MEOX2 promote proteasomal degradation of LRP1 to reduce its expression. However, another study reported that MEOX2 haploinsufficiency does not affect Aβ plaque deposition in APP/PS1 mice. The contradictory findings may be due to differences in study models, requiring further investigation into MEOX2’s impact on LRP1 expression. In summary, LRP1 function and expression are regulated by multiple factors, some of which may provide new therapeutic targets for AD.

Other influence factors

Age-dependent decline in LRP1 expression may be a key molecular basis for the high prevalence of LOAD. Additionally, various proteases, including β-secretase1 (BACE-1), membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT-1MMP), ADAM family metalloproteinases (ADAM10, ADAM17) and tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), can cleave LRP1 from the cell surface, increasing sLRP1 levels in the bloodstream. Oxidative stress disrupts the ability of LRP1 and sLRP1 to bind Aβ and Aβ induces LRP1 oxidation in turn, further impairing its ability to clear Aβ. Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α downregulate LRP1 expression in human MVECs and BLECs to promote Aβ accumulation, which also highlighting the role of neuroinflammation in AD progression. Certain metals also impact LRP1 function, for example, aluminum downregulates LRP1 levels in PC12 cells, while lead exposure reduces LRP1 expression in cortical capillaries and the hippocampus. High blood glucose and cholesterol levels lower LRP1 expression in brain microvascular endothelial cells, affecting Aβ efflux from the brain. Additionally, chronic alcohol consumption decreases hepatic LRP1 expression and increases brain Aβ levels.

Changes in LRP1 expression levels in AD patients

LRP1 is highly expressed in neurons, particularly in key brain regions associated with AD, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum. Studies indicate that compared to non-dementia controls (NDC), LRP1 mRNA expression is elevated in brain regions like the hippocampus and temporal cortex. However, LRP1 expression in AD patients exhibits spatial heterogeneity: vascular endothelial LRP1 is compensatory upregulated in response to increased Aβ burden, while neuronal LRP1 is downregulated, potentially exacerbating synaptic Aβ toxicity and tau aggregation. In addition, decreased LRP1 mRNA levels have been observed in the cerebellum, middle frontal cortex and occipital lobe of AD patients. Moreover, AD patients show a significant decline in plasma sLRP1 levels, along with increased oxidative modifications, which may be related to reduced hepatic LRP1 synthesis and increased MMP-9-mediated shedding. Overall, the significant alterations in LRP1 expression across different brain regions in AD suggest that regulating LRP1 levels in these areas could be a potential therapeutic strategy for AD.

The translational potential of LRP1 as an early diagnostic biomarker

As a primary receptor for Aβ binding, LRP1 loss in endothelial cells is observed not only in aging populations but also in the early stages of AD. Evidence suggests that plasma sLRP1 levels are significantly lower in APOE ε4 carriers compared to non-carriers, with a negative correlation between APOE ε4 status and plasma sLRP1 levels. Additionally, in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients, oxidative modifications of sLRP1 impair its ability to bind Aβ, which correlates with cognitive decline as MCI progresses to AD. Another study reported that the sensitivity of sLRP1 for AD diagnosis reached 77.8%and combining sLRP1 with soluble receptor for advanced glycation end-products (sRAGE) improved diagnostic accuracy compared to using either biomarker alone. These findings indicate that sLRP1 holds promise as an early biomarker for MCI-to-AD conversion, though further validation is required to establish its diagnostic efficacy. The precise quantification of LRP1 and sLRP1 is crucial for advancing this research area. The most used method, ELISA, has limitations such as potential cross-reactivity and the inability to provide molecular size information. To address these challenges, researchers have explored liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) for detecting LRP1 levels in vitreous and corneal tissues to achieve high sensitivity and specificity. However, LC–MS/MS is complex and costly, limiting its widespread use. Developing more efficient and accessible LRP1 detection methods is essential to fully realize its potential as an early diagnostic biomarker for AD patients.

LRP1 as a therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease

Given the critical role of LRP1 in Aβ metabolism, developing targeted therapies to regulate LRP1 activity and expression holds significant clinical potential for AD. Multiple studies have investigated whether modulating LRP1 expression can promote Aβ clearance and slow AD progression. Current research on LRP1-targeted therapies primarily focuses on pharmacological and genetic approaches. Existing therapeutic strategies aim for dual regulation: one is Enhancing membrane-bound LRP1 activity in the BBB and liver to facilitate Aβ transport and clearance, another is stabilizing or supplementing circulating sLRP1 to maintain peripheral Aβ-binding capacity to restore the pathological imbalance in brain-periphery Aβ dynamics.

Pharmacological therapy

Studies have found that tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), an ecto-enzyme upregulated in the brains of AD patients, inhibits LRP1-mediated Aβ transport across the BBB and Block TNAP can enhance Aβ clearance through LRP1-mediated transport across the BBB. Granule calcium protein (GCA) competes with Aβ for LRP1 binding in microglia and treatment with GCA-neutralizing antibodies has been shown to increase LRP1 levels and inhibit AD progression. A recent study also found that exposure to low-intensity blasts may enhance endothelial clearance of Aβ through LRP1-mediated transcytosis. It suggests that future research may explore using sound and pressure as potential therapeutic approaches for AD. These findings represent novel and potentially effective treatment strategies for AD patients, though further investigation is required.

Significant progress has been made in studying pharmacological approaches to regulate LRP1 levels and promote Aβ clearance. Studies have demonstrated that cholesterol-lowering statins can enhance LRP1 expression and promote Aβ clearance. For instance, fluvastatin reduces Aβ levels by increasing LRP1 expression in cerebral microvessels. Simvastatin has been found to upregulate LRP1 expression in human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs). Moreover, Angiopep-2-modified statin nanoparticles can penetrate the BBB via LRP1-mediated receptor transcytosis while simultaneously inducing endothelial LRP1 upregulation, leading to both Aβ clearance and neuroprotection. Additionally, thiazolidinedione drugs such as low-dose rosiglitazone enhance Aβ clearance by upregulating LRP1 mRNA and protein expression in HBMECs and increasing LRP1 promoter activity. Low-dose pioglitazone similarly enhances Aβ clearance by increasing LRP1 activity.

Moreover, lithium can enhance LRP1 transcription by inhibiting GSK-3β, while magnesium regulates metal ion homeostasis to maintain LRP1 structural activity and a ketogenic diet activates the PPARγ-LRP1 axis through β-hydroxybutyrate, optimizing Aβ brain–blood distribution via multiple pathways. Supplementation with omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) has also been shown to increase LRP1 expression in HBMECs. Studies have revealed that canolol can activate the Nrf2/ARE pathway to reduce oxidative stress at the BBB while upregulating both P-gp and LRP1 expression to enhance Aβ efflux and degradation. Andrographolide, a bioactive component of Andrographis paniculata, promotes cell viability and increases LRP1 expression while reducing neuroinflammation to mitigate Aβ-induced cytotoxicity. The traditional Chinese medicine formula ZhengXingshuiYizhi Fang (XSF) has been found to inhibit Aβ-induced endothelial apoptosis via the PI3K/Akt/NF-κB pathway and restore Aβ clearance across the BBB by upregulating LRP1 expression, highlighting the potential of multi-target interventions in AD treatment.

In cultured murine brain endothelial cells, treatments with Lycopene Aldehyde or canolol increased P-gp and LRP1 expression and activity, with canolol also exhibiting notable anti-inflammatory effects. Moderate ethanol exposure (MEE) was found to reduce neuroinflammation and Aβ deposition in APP/PS1 mice by regulating LRP1 expression. Tanshinone IIA (Tan IIA) enhances LRP1 expression in both animal models and cultured cells, promoting Aβ transport by alleviating SIRT1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs) to improve cognitive deficits in APP/PS1 mice. Gardenia-derived flavonoid GJ-4 has been reported to increase LRP1 expression and significantly improve spatial learning and memory abilities in AD mouse models. In vitro studies using bexarotene (Bex) and astaxanthin (Asx) on 3xTgAD mice have demonstrated that Bex and Asx can reduce BACE1 expression while increasing LRP1 expression in microvascular brain endothelial cells and enhance Aβ clearance. Similarly, research on the methanol extract of Moringa oleifera (MO) in APP/PS1 mice has shown that MO treatment increases LRP1 expression while reducing BACE1 and other protein levels, effectively lowering Aβ burden to levels comparable to wild-type control mice.

In the liver, the cholesterol-lowering drug atorvastatin has been shown to promote peripheral Aβ clearance by inducing SREBP2, which upregulates hepatic LRP1 levels. Additionally, extracting from withania somnifera (Ashwagandha) not only increases LRP1 expression in the liver but also elevates sLRP1 levels in the bloodstream and facilitates Aβ metabolism. In addition, replacing oxidized sLRP1 to restore Aβ binding and transport in plasma represents a promising therapeutic strategy for AD.

However, merely increasing LRP1 levels may not be sufficient. For example, Aβ clearance remains impaired despite increased LRP1 expression in the brain of mice lacking vitamin E synthase. It suggests that additional cofactors may be involved in Aβ clearance processes. Moreover, overexpression of LRP1 may have potential drawbacks, as it has been implicated in promoting APP amyloid genesis and facilitating amyloid accumulation in neurons. Additionally, drugs that regulate LRP1 levels may affect the clearance of other molecules and metabolites, potentially disrupting broader metabolic processes. Thus, further research is necessary to fully understand the therapeutic implications of LRP1-targeted pharmacological interventions for AD treatment.

Gene therapy

Gene therapy, as an emerging treatment approach for AD, aims to correct abnormal gene expression by introducing specific genes into patient cells. Studies have found that the absence of ANKS1A protein in endothelial cells leads to reduce surface LRP1 levels and decrease Aβ clearance across the BBB. Brain endothelial-specific ANKS1A gene therapy can reverse these defects by restoring LRP1 levels and facilitating Aβ clearance through the BBB. Another study identified NYGGF4 as a novel LRP1-interacting protein that specifically binds to LRP1. Compared to age-matched control groups, NYGGF4 expression in AD patients gradually decreases alongside LRP1 as the disease progresses. It suggests that targeting NYGGF4-LRP1 interactions may provide a potential strategy for upregulating LRP1 expression in AD treatment. In past research, adeno-associated virus (AAV) has been used as a gene therapy vector, enabling long-term gene expression in both dividing and non-dividing cells. One study revealed that reduced mNAT1 expression leads to a decline in regulators responsible for exporting Aβ-LRP1 complexes and researchers successfully reinstated the normal export function of Aβ-LRP1 complexes by selectively restoring mNAT1 expression in brain endothelial cells via AAV to reduce Aβ deposition.

Although these gene therapy strategies are still in the research phase and remain distant from clinical application, they hold distinct advantages over pharmacological treatments by minimizing drug-related toxicity risks and paving the way for personalized therapy for AD patients.

Conclusion and outlook

Current research has established LRP1 as a key player in Aβ clearance and metabolism, significantly influencing AD pathology. Targeting LRP1 as a therapeutic approach for AD, including pharmacological and gene therapies, is actively under development. Despite there is significant progress in understanding LRP1 expression and function, the clinical translation of LRP1-targeted therapy faces several challenges. One major issue is the dual role of LRP1, as it is involved in both Aβ clearance and APP processing. Developing subtype-selective regulatory tools, such as monoclonal antibodies targeting extracellular ligand-binding domains, could help overcome this limitation. As a central node in the Aβ metabolic network, LRP1 function is finely regulated by APOE isoforms, inflammatory microenvironments and epigenetic modifications. Future studies should leverage single cell sequencing and spatial transcriptomics to map the spatiotemporal dynamics of LRP1 activity. Additionally, since LRP1 participates in multiple physiological systems, the development of LRP1-based AD therapies requires rigorous toxicity and safety assessments to mitigate potential adverse effects. LRP1 expression and function are influenced by various factors, including inflammation, oxidative stress, receptor shedding and genetic signaling. Thus, overcoming off-target risks associated with its multifunctionality is crucial. Potential strategies include developing tissue-specific delivery systems (e.g., optimized AAV serotypes) and subdomain-selective LRP1 modulators to balance therapeutic efficacy and safety. Furthermore, whether LRP1-targeted therapy affects other neurological functions remains to be fully investigated. Future research should integrate LRP1 gene-editing models, organoid technology and in vivo imaging to elucidate its functional heterogeneity across different brain regions and cell types. Additionally, combining LRP1 modulators with anti-tau antibodies or neuroinflammation inhibitors could provide synergistic therapeutic benefits.

In conclusion, LRP1 plays a crucial role in AD pathogenesis and represents a promising therapeutic target. However, challenges such as its multifaceted functions and off-target effects must be addressed. Moving forward, the development of selective regulatory tools, the integration of advanced technologies and stringent safety monitoring will be essential to balance efficacy and safety, ultimately paving the way for clinical application.

Edited by: Orly Lazarov, University of Illinois Chicago, United States

Reviewed by: Sabitha K. Rajesh, University of Illinois at Chicago, United States

Elena Puris, University of Eastern Finland, Finland

Author contributions

YD: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. HY: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. ZL: Investigation, Writing – review & editing. HL: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. WL: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. CZ: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. NP: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. XT: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. QG: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

The author(s) declared that they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

Generative AI statement

The authors declare that no Gen AI was used in the creation of this manuscript.

Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us.

Publisher’s note

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References

Exposure to low-intensity blast increases clearance of brain amyloid Beta

Olive-oil-derived oleocanthal enhances β-amyloid clearance as a potential neuroprotective mechanism against Alzheimer's disease: in vitro and in vivo studies

Differentiating visceral sensory ganglion organoids from induced pluripotent stem cells

Blood-brain barrier breakdown in Alzheimer's disease: mechanisms and targeted strategies

Low density lipoprotein receptor related proteins as regulators of neural stem and progenitor cell function

A multifaceted role for apoE in the clearance of beta-amyloid across the blood-brain barrier

Human amyloid-beta synthesis and clearance rates as measured in cerebrospinal fluid in vivo

Oxidative stress is associated with aβ accumulation in chronic sleep deprivation model

SRF and myocardin regulate LRP-mediated amyloid-beta clearance in brain vascular cells

Transport pathways for clearance of human Alzheimer's amyloid beta-peptide and apolipoproteins E and J in the mouse central nervous system

Alzheimer's disease

Apolipoprotein E and its receptors in Alzheimer's disease: pathways, pathogenesis and therapy

Synergy between amyloid-β and tau in Alzheimer's disease

Rapid endocytosis of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein modulates cell surface distribution and processing of the beta-amyloid precursor protein

Regulation of P-glycoprotein in the brain

Hepatic LRP-1 plays an important role in amyloidosis in Alzheimer's disease mice: potential role in chronic heavy alcohol feeding

Platelets are the primary source of amyloid beta-peptide in human blood

LRP1 is a neuronal receptor for α-synuclein uptake and spread

Amyloid beta: structure, biology and structure-based therapeutic development

Physiological β-amyloid clearance by the liver and its therapeutic potential for Alzheimer's disease

Peripheral clearance of brain-derived aβ in Alzheimer's disease: pathophysiology and therapeutic perspectives

Regulation of tau internalization, degradation, and seeding by LRP1 reveals multiple pathways for tau catabolism

Protective effect of apolipoprotein E type 2 allele for late onset Alzheimer disease

Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer's disease in late onset families

The LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) regulates the PDGF signaling pathway by binding the protein phosphatase SHP-2 and modulating SHP-2- mediated PDGF signaling events

Beta amyloid fragments derived from activated platelets deposit in cerebrovascular endothelium: usage of a novel blood brain barrier endothelial cell model system

RAGE mediates amyloid-beta peptide transport across the blood-brain barrier and accumulation in brain

apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid beta peptide clearance from mouse brain

LRP/amyloid beta-peptide interaction mediates differential brain efflux of Abeta isoforms

A receptor that lets dementia-associated tau proteins into neurons

Peripheral anti-a beta antibody alters CNS and plasma a beta clearance and decreases brain a beta burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease

RAGE, LRP-1, and amyloid-beta protein in Alzheimer's disease

Molecular basis of familial and sporadic Alzheimer's disease

Repetitive head trauma and apoE4 induce chronic cerebrovascular alterations that impair tau elimination from the brain

Importance of CSF-based aβ clearance with age in humans increases with declining efficacy of blood-brain barrier/proteolytic pathways

Lipopolysaccharide impairs amyloid β efflux from brain: altered vascular sequestration, cerebrospinal fluid reabsorption, peripheral clearance and transporter function at the blood-brain barrier

Locus coeruleus integrity and neuropsychiatric symptoms in a cohort of early- and late-onset Alzheimer's disease

Paricalcitol accelerates BACE1 lysosomal degradation and inhibits calpain-1 dependent neuronal loss in APP/PS1 transgenic mice

Astrocyte-derived lactoferrin reduces β-amyloid burden by promoting the interaction between p38 kinase and PP2A phosphatase in male APP/PS1 transgenic mice

Astaxanthin exerts protective effects similar to bexarotene in Alzheimer's disease by modulating amyloid-beta and cholesterol homeostasis in blood-brain barrier endothelial cells

Amyloid-beta impairs insulin signaling by accelerating autophagy-lysosomal degradation of LRP-1 and IR-β in blood-brain barrier endothelial cells in vitro and in 3XTg-AD mice

Relationship between peripheral transport proteins and plasma amyloid-β in patients with Alzheimer's disease were different from cognitively Normal controls: a propensity score matching analysis

Modulation of hepatic amyloid precursor protein and lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 by chronic alcohol intake: potential link between liver steatosis and amyloid-β

Systemic catabolism of Alzheimer's Abeta40 and Abeta42

beta-amyloid-induced migration of monocytes across human brain endothelial cells involves RAGE and PECAM-1

Alzheimer's disease: initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein

Potential link of high fat diet and mRNA expression of Alzheimer's disease-related genes in the enteric mucosa of a rat model of Alzheimer's disease

Adeno-associated virus vectorology, manufacturing, and clinical applications

Abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology

LRP1-upregulated nanoparticles for efficiently conquering the blood-brain barrier and targetedly suppressing multifocal and infiltrative brain metastases

Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer's disease

Restoring blood-brain barrier P-glycoprotein reduces brain amyloid-beta in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease

Surface location and high affinity for calcium of a 500-kd liver membrane protein closely related to the LDL-receptor suggest a physiological role as lipoprotein receptor

Elimination of substances from the brain parenchyma: efflux via perivascular pathways and via the blood-brain barrier

Apolipoprotein E influences amyloid-beta clearance from the murine periphery

Inflammatory cytokine IL-1β downregulates endothelial LRP1 via MicroRNA-mediated gene silencing

Apolipoprotein E: structure and function in lipid metabolism, neurobiology, and Alzheimer's diseases

Presynaptic localization of neprilysin contributes to efficient clearance of amyloid-beta peptide in mouse brain

Testing the neurovascular hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease: LRP-1 antisense reduces blood-brain barrier clearance, increases brain levels of amyloid-beta protein, and impairs cognition

Plasma β-amyloid in Alzheimer's disease and vascular disease

Evidence for altered LRP/RAGE expression in Alzheimer lesion pathogenesis

Resting heart rate is associated with novel plasma atherosclerosis biomarkers

The prevalence of dementia: a quantitative integration of the literature

Andrographolide exerts a neuroprotective effect by regulating the LRP1-mediated PPARγ/NF-κB pathway

Extensive proteomic screening identifies the obesity-related NYGGF4 protein as a novel LRP1-interactor, showing reduced expression in early Alzheimer's disease

The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 and amyloid-β clearance in Alzheimer's disease

LRP1 in brain vascular smooth muscle cells mediates local clearance of Alzheimer's amyloid-β

ApoE and aβ in Alzheimer's disease: accidental encounters or partners?

Low to moderate ethanol exposure reduces astrocyte-induced neuroinflammatory signaling and cognitive decline in presymptomatic APP/PS1 mice

The precursor of Alzheimer's disease amyloid A4 protein resembles a cell-surface receptor

Modulation of amyloid beta-protein clearance and Alzheimer's disease susceptibility by the LDL receptor-related protein pathway

Effects of the APOEɛ4 allele on the relationship between tau and amyloid-β in early- and late-onset Alzheimer's disease

Microbiota-gut-brain axis: the mediator of exercise and brain health

Age-dependent changes in brain, CSF, and plasma amyloid (beta) protein in the Tg2576 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease

Autoregulated paracellular clearance of amyloid-β across the blood-brain barrier

Paired helical filaments in electron microscopy of Alzheimer's disease

Microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) is a major antigenic component of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer disease

Structures and functions of multiligand lipoprotein receptors: macrophage scavenger receptors and LDL receptor-related protein (LRP)

ANKS1A regulates LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1)-mediated cerebrovascular clearance in brain endothelial cells

The LDL receptor-related protein 1: mechanisms and roles in promoting aβ efflux transporter in Alzheimer's disease

The YXXL motif, but not the two NPXY motifs, serves as the dominant endocytosis signal for low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein

Secretion of Alzheimer's disease Abeta amyloid peptide by activated human platelets

Decreased plasma levels of soluble low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (sLRP) and the soluble form of the receptor for advanced glycation end products (sRAGE) in the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease

Neuronal LRP1 regulates glucose metabolism and insulin signaling in the brain

Astrocytic LRP1 mediates brain aβ clearance and impacts amyloid deposition

High affinity of β-amyloid proteins to cerebral capillaries: implications in chronic lead exposure-induced neurotoxicity in rats

LRP1 shedding in human brain: roles of ADAM10 and ADAM17

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) interacts with presenilin 1 and is a competitive substrate of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) for gamma-secretase

Sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 negatively regulates low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein transcription

Sterol regulatory element binding proteins downregulate LDL receptor-related protein (LRP1) expression and LRP1-mediated aggregated LDL uptake by human macrophages

Tight junctions at the blood brain barrier: physiological architecture and disease-associated dysregulation

Gut microbiota-host lipid crosstalk in Alzheimer's disease: implications for disease progression and therapeutics

High burdens of phosphorylated tau protein and distinct precuneus atrophy in sporadic early-onset Alzheimer's disease

Apolipoprotein E recognizes Alzheimer's disease associated 3-O sulfation of heparan Sulfate

Moringa Oleifera alleviates aβ burden and improves synaptic plasticity and cognitive impairments in APP/PS1 mice

LRP1 is critical for the surface distribution and internalization of the NR2B NMDA receptor subtype

Targeting ApoE4/ApoE receptor LRP1 in Alzheimer's disease

Leptin signaling and Alzheimer's disease

Soluble Abeta homeostasis in AD and DS: impairment of anti-amyloidogenic protection by lipoproteins

Novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease by peripheral administration of agents with an affinity to beta-amyloid

Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alzheimer's disease

Neuronal LRP1 functionally associates with postsynaptic proteins and is required for normal motor function in mice

Transport of Alzheimer's associated amyloid-β catalyzed by P-glycoprotein

Distribution of the alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in human tissues

The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) interactome in the human cornea

In vitro investigation of amyloid-β hepatobiliary disposition in sandwich-cultured primary rat hepatocytes

Up-regulation of hepatic low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1: a possible novel mechanism of antiatherogenic activity of hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme a reductase inhibitor atorvastatin and hepatic LRP1 expression

The effect of rosiglitazone on LRP1 expression and amyloid β uptake in human brain microvascular endothelial cells: a possible role of a low-dose thiazolidinedione for dementia treatment

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) forms a signaling complex with platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta in endosomes and regulates activation of the MAPK pathway

The second and fourth cluster of class a cysteine-rich repeats of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein share ligand-binding properties

Depletion of vitamin E increases amyloid beta accumulation by decreasing its clearances from brain and blood in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease

Dissection of receptor folding and ligand-binding property with functional minireceptors of LDL receptor-related protein

Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer's disease

Alzheimer's disease as a membrane dysfunction tauopathy? New insights into the amyloid Cascade hypothesis

Cognitive benefits of lithium chloride in APP/PS1 mice are associated with enhanced brain clearance of β-amyloid

Mitochondrial NADK2-dependent NADPH controls Tau oligomer uptake in human neurons

Peripheral amyloid-β clearance mediates cognitive impairment in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 as a potential therapeutic target in Alzheimer's disease

Effect of β-amyloid on blood-brain barrier properties and function

FE65 constitutes the functional link between the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and the amyloid precursor protein

Tissue-type plasminogen activator-mediated shedding of astrocytic low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein increases the permeability of the neurovascular unit

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related Protein-1 in cardiac inflammation and infarct healing

Elevation of LDL receptor-related protein levels via ligand interactions in Alzheimer disease and in vitro

Oleocanthal enhances amyloid-β clearance from the brains of TgSwDI mice and in vitro across a human blood-brain barrier model

Soluble low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) circulates in human plasma

Impaired vascular-mediated clearance of brain amyloid beta in Alzheimer's disease: the role, regulation and restoration of LRP1

LRP1 is a master regulator of tau uptake and spread

Late-onset vs nonmendelian early-onset Alzheimer disease: a distinction without a difference?

Secreted amyloid-β precursor protein functions as a GABA(B)R1a ligand to modulate synaptic transmission

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) as a novel regulator of early Astroglial differentiation

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein LRP is regulated by membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) proteolysis in malignant cells

Prion protein-mediated toxicity of amyloid-β oligomers requires lipid rafts and the transmembrane LRP1

LRP1 expression in cerebral cortex, choroid plexus and meningeal blood vessels: relationship to cerebral amyloid angiopathy and APOE status

Clearance of amyloid-beta by circulating lipoprotein receptors

Impaired lipoprotein receptor-mediated peripheral binding of plasma amyloid-β is an early biomarker for mild cognitive impairment preceding Alzheimer's disease

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1: a physiological aβ homeostatic mechanism with multiple therapeutic opportunities

Alzheimer's disease

Withania somnifera reverses Alzheimer's disease pathology by enhancing low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in liver

Amyloid beta-peptide is produced by cultured cells during normal metabolism: a reprise

Biochemistry and molecular biology of amyloid beta-protein and the mechanism of Alzheimer's disease

Low-dose pioglitazone can ameliorate learning and memory impairment in a mouse model of dementia by increasing LRP1 expression in the hippocampus

Transient blood-brain barrier disruption is induced by low pulsed electrical fields in vitro: an analysis of permeability and trans-endothelial electric resistivity

Altered clearance of beta-amyloid from the cerebrospinal fluid following subchronic lead exposure in rats: roles of RAGE and LRP1 in the choroid plexus

Peripheral blood amyloid-β involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease via impacting on peripheral innate immune cells

Clearance of Alzheimer's amyloid-ss(1-40) peptide from brain by LDL receptor-related protein-1 at the blood-brain barrier

Reduction of brain beta-amyloid (Abeta) by fluvastatin, a hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitor, through increase in degradation of amyloid precursor protein C-terminal fragments (APP-CTFs) and Abeta clearance

Role of LRP1 in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease: evidence from clinical and preclinical studies

Plasma beta-amyloid (a beta) 40 concentration, lipid status and age in humans

Heparan Sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) serve as the mediator between monomeric tau and its subsequent intracellular ERK1/2 pathway activation

Blockade of brain alkaline phosphatase efficiently reduces amyloid-β plaque burden and associated cognitive impairment

Meox2 haploinsufficiency increases neuronal cell loss in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease

The concerted amyloid-beta clearance of LRP1 and ABCB1/P-gp across the blood-brain barrier is linked by PICALM

Endothelial LRP1 transports amyloid-β(1-42) across the blood-brain barrier

Abundance of P-glycoprotein and other drug transporters at the human blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer's disease: a quantitative targeted proteomic study

Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde: ApoE explains opposing effects of neuronal LRP1

Clinical research on Alzheimer's disease: Progress and perspectives

APOE4-mediated amyloid-β pathology depends on its neuronal receptor LRP1

RAGE-mediated signaling contributes to intraneuronal transport of amyloid-beta and neuronal dysfunction

Protection against Alzheimer's disease with apoE epsilon 2

Major involvement of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 in the clearance of plasma free amyloid beta-peptide by the liver

Clearance systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease

Alzheimer's disease: pathogenesis, diagnostics, and therapeutics

Modulation of beta-amyloid precursor protein processing by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). Evidence that LRP contributes to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease

LRP1 has a predominant role in production over clearance of aβ in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease

Experimental investigation of antibody-mediated clearance mechanisms of amyloid-beta in CNS of Tg-SwDI transgenic mice

Cross-platform identification and validation of uveal melanoma vitreous protein biomarkers

ApoE influences amyloid-β (aβ) clearance despite minimal apoE/aβ association in physiological conditions

Ketone bodies promote amyloid-β(1-40) clearance in a human in vitro blood-brain barrier model

TNF-α and IL-1β modulate blood-brain barrier permeability and decrease amyloid-β peptide efflux in a human blood-brain barrier model

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) is a novel beta-secretase (BACE1) substrate

LRP1 modulates APP trafficking along early compartments of the secretory pathway

Tanshinone IIA ameliorates aβ transendothelial transportation through SIRT1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress

A systemic view of Alzheimer disease - insights from amyloid-β metabolism beyond the brain

A blood-based composite panel that screens Alzheimer's disease

Associations between hepatic functions and plasma amyloid-Beta levels-implications for the capacity of liver in peripheral amyloid-Beta clearance

Interactions of amyloid-β with membrane proteins

GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer's disease vasculo-neuronal dysfunction and degeneration

Role of the MEOX2 homeobox gene in neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer disease

Environmental lead exposure aggravates the progression of Alzheimer's disease in mice by targeting on blood brain barrier

Effect of Zhenxin Xingshui Yizhi Fang on aβ(25-35) induced expression of related transporters in HBMEC cell model

The role of LRP1 in aβ efflux transport across the blood-brain barrier and cognitive dysfunction in diabetes mellitus

RAGE and amyloid-beta peptide neurotoxicity in Alzheimer's disease

Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids promote brain-to-blood clearance of β-amyloid in a mouse model with Alzheimer's disease

Mechanisms linking obesity, insulin resistance, and Alzheimer's disease: effects of polyphenols and Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids

Rapid in vivo measurement of β-amyloid reveals biphasic clearance kinetics in an Alzheimer's mouse model

Regulatory effects of simvastatin and apoJ on APP processing and amyloid-β clearance in blood-brain barrier endothelial cells

Increased soluble amyloid-beta peptide and memory deficits in amyloid model mice overexpressing the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein

GJ-4 alleviates aβ(25-35)-induced memory dysfunction in mice through protecting the neurovascular unit

Effect of Aluminum-maltolate on the content of aβ protein and the expression of ApoER2, VLDLRs, and LRP1 in PC12-ApoE4 cells

The relationship between amyloid-beta and brain capillary endothelial cells in Alzheimer's disease

Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood-brain barrier transcytosis and clearance

Effect of high cholesterol regulation of LRP1 and RAGE on aβ transport across the blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer's disease

Insulin Signaling differentially regulates the trafficking of insulin and amyloid Beta peptides at the blood-brain barrier

Bone marrow-derived GCA(+) immune cells drive Alzheimer's disease progression

Magnesium reduces blood-brain barrier permeability and regulates amyloid-β transcytosis

Neurodegeneration and the neurovascular unit

Reduction of mNAT1/hNAT2 contributes to cerebral endothelial necroptosis and aβ accumulation in Alzheimer's disease