Low Density Receptor-Related Protein 1 Interactions With the Extracellular Matrix: More Than Meets the Eye

The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a biological substrate composed of collagens, proteoglycans and glycoproteins that ensures proper cell migration and adhesion and keeps the cell architecture intact. The regulation of the ECM composition is a vital process strictly controlled by, among others, proteases, growth factors and adhesion receptors. As it appears, ECM remodeling is also essential for proper neuronal and glial development and the establishment of adequate synaptic signaling. Hence, disturbances in ECM functioning are often present in neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease. Moreover, mutations in ECM molecules are found in some forms of epilepsy and malfunctioning of ECM-related genes and pathways can be seen in, for example, cancer or ischemic injury. Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (Lrp1) is a member of the low density lipoprotein receptor family. Lrp1 is involved not only in ligand uptake, receptor mediated endocytosis and lipoprotein transport—functions shared by low density lipoprotein receptor family members—but also regulates cell surface protease activity, controls cellular entry and binding of toxins and viruses, protects against atherosclerosis and acts on many cell signaling pathways. Given the plethora of functions, it is not surprising that Lrp1 also impacts the ECM and is involved in its remodeling. This review focuses on the role of Lrp1 and some of its major ligands on ECM function. Specifically, interactions with two Lrp1 ligands, integrins and tissue plasminogen activator are described in more detail.

Introduction

Lrp1: A Hidden Multitasker

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (Lrp1), also known as CD91 or α-2-macroglobulin (α-2-M) receptor, is a member of the low density lipoprotein receptor family and is expressed in various tissues including liver, adipose tissue, lungs and brain. The receptor, with a mass of 600 kDa, during its biosynthesis, undergoes a furin-mediated proteolytical cleavage in the Golgi apparatus. This cleavage results in two, non-covalently bound polypeptide subunits—an 85 kDa membrane-bound C-terminal fragment (the light β chain) and a 515 kDa N-terminal fragment located extracellularly (the heavy α chain)—that form the mature Lrp1 (Figure 1). The Lrp1 α chain contains 4 ligand binding complement-like repeat clusters separated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeats. Clusters II and IV are considered to be responsible for the majority of ligand binding and have previously been shown to display minor differences regarding the kinetics of the interactions but to be also highly similar in their ligand binding properties (duplication of the domains). As suggested by, each ligand-binding domain of Lrp1 presents very different charge densities and hydrophobic patches. These differences in turn lead to varying receptor-ligand interactions and are responsible for a distinct ligand specificity of each cluster, despite similar backbone folds. Because Lrp1 interacts with a wide variety of protein ligands (Table 1), it is necessary to study each domain individually to elucidate its exact ligand-binding capacities. Interestingly, receptor-associated protein (RAP) binds to the ligand-binding clusters and completely blocks interactions with all known Lrp1 ligands.

The structure of Lrp1. Lrp1 is cleaved by furin (red arrow) in the Golgi complex and afterwards is transported to the cell membrane. The resulting mature Lrp1 receptor consists of a 515 kDa alpha chain and an 85 kDa beta chain bound to each other non-covalently. The alpha chain consists of ligand-binding-type repeats forming four clusters (I–IV) that are rich in cysteine. The clusters contain 2, 8, 10, and 11 repeats, respectively. The clusters II and IV are responsible for the majority of ligand binding to Lrp1. The ligand-binding clusters are separated by 1–4 EGF homology domains, with cysteine-rich EGF repeats. The intracellular beta chain consists of two NPxY motifs, one YxxL motif and two di-leucine motifs that have been associated with the endocytotic functions of Lrp1. The beta chain also interacts with scaffolding proteins like PSD-95, Dab-1, and FE-65. Both the extra- and intracellular chain can act independently of each other, when the alpha chain is shed as a soluble Lrp1 and the beta chain translocates to the nucleus and activates gene transcription and signaling cascades. α-2-M, α-2-macroglobulin; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; COOH, carboxy terminal; Dab-1, disabled 1; EGF, epidermal growth factor; NH2, amino terminal; PAI-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1; PSD-95, postsynaptic density protein 95; tPA, tissue plasminogen activator.

Representative molecules interacting with the Lrp1 receptor.

Molecule and function	Reference	 	α1-antitrypsin (A1AT or A1PI)	Member of the serpin superfamily, inhibits various proteases, regulates enzymes produced by inflammatory cells like neutrophil elastase		 	α1-antitrypsin:trypsin complexes	Serpin-enzyme complex		 	α-2 macroglobulin (α-2-M)	Member of the α-2 globulin family. Protease inhibitor, inhibits a wide range of proteinases		 	Amidoglycosides: gentamicin, polymixcin B	Antibiotics used to treat various bacterial infections		 	Amyloid β peptide	Peptide derived from amyloid precursor protein processing. Main component of amyloid plaques found in Alzheimer’s patients		 	Amyloid precursor protein (APP)	Integral membrane protein, during its proteolysis the amyloid β peptide is generated		 	Annexin VI	Member of the calcium-dependent membrane and phospholipid binding proteins; co-receptor of Lrp1, involved in endocytosis processes, interacts with α-2-M		 	Apolipoprotein E (ApoE)/ApoE-containing lipoproteins	Fat-binding protein produced by astrocytes, essential for the catabolism of lipoproteins and their transport; main cholesterol carrier in the brain		 	Aprotinin	Single-chain globular polypeptide derived from bovine lungs; inhibits serine proteases		 	Bone morphogenic factor 4 (BMP4) BMP-binding endothelial cell precursor-derived regulator	Growth and differentiation factor; important for neurogenesis, bone and cartilage metabolism		 	C1s/C1q	Form the complement component C1 complex that initiates the classical pathway of component activation		 	C4b-binding protein (C4BP)	Inhibitor in the complement system		 	Calreticulin	Calcium-binding chaperone protein, regulates many cellular processes		 	Cathepsin D	Lysosomal aspartic protease, member of the peptidase A1 family, involved in protein degradation		 	CCN1, cysteine-rich angiogenic inducer 61 (CYR61)	Secreted, matrix-associated signaling protein involved in apoptosis, adhesion, migration and vascular integrity		 	Chylomicron remnants	Lipoprotein particles comprising triglycerides, phospholipids, cholesterol, and proteins involved in lipid transport		 	Coagulation factor VIII	Blood-clotting protein, participates in blood coagulation		 	Coagulation factor Xa: tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) complexes	Coagulation factor X is a serine protease that in its active form (Xa) converts prothrombin into thrombin and plays a role in blood coagulation; TFPI reversibly inhibits factor Xa		 	Coagulation factor XIa:nexin complexes	Coagulation factor XI is a serine protease that in its active form (XIa) initiates the intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation by activating factor IX; complexes with nexin-1 inhibit its function		 	Complement component 3	Plays a role in the activation of the classical and alternative complement activation pathways		 	Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF; CCN2)	Matricellular protein of the extracellular matrix-associated heparin-binding protein family, involved in cell adhesion, migration, and angiogenesis		 	Decorin (Dcn)	Member of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan family that impacts the activities of growth factors, regulates extracellular matrix assembly and cell adhesion		 	Disabled 1 (Dab1)	Adaptor protein known to activate Src		 	FE-65	Adaptor protein involved in APP processing		 	Fibronectin	Glycoprotein of the extracellular matrix vital for cell differentiation, migration and adhesion		 	Frizzled-1	G-coupled receptor protein involved in the Wnt pathway		 	Glypican-3:Hedgehog complexes	Glypican-3 is a heparan sulfate proteoglycan that impacts embryonic growth by inhibiting the hedgehog signaling pathway		 	Heat shock protein 90, 96, 70	Intracellular chaperon proteins assisting in protein folding		 	Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs)	Glycoproteins containing one or more covalently attached heparan sulfate chains; present at the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix; endocytic and adhesion receptors, regulate cell migration		 	Hepatic lipase	Lipase involved in lipoprotein metabolism and transport		 	HIV-Tat protein	Transactivator of viral genes in cells infected with HIV		 	Insulin	Peptide hormone produced by the pancreas that regulates the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats and proteins		 	Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3)	Protein produced and secreted by the liver, carrier of insulin-like growth factors		 	Lactoferrin	Multifunctional protein of the transferrin family with an antibacterial function		 	Leptin	Hormone produced by adipose cells involved in energy balance and neuronal functioning		 	Lipoprotein lipase (LPL)	Lipase involved in lipoprotein metabolism and transport		 	Malaria circumsporozoite protein (CSP)	Secreted protein of the sporozoite stage of the malaria parasite		 	Matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2)	Proteinase involved in the degradation of the extracellular matrix, metastasis		 	Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9)	Proteinase involved in the degradation of the extracellular matrix, angiogenesis, metastasis		 	Matrix metalloproteinase 13 (collagenase-3) (MMP-13)	Proteinase involved in the degradation of the extracellular matrix, angiogenesis, metastasis		 	Metallothionein II	Cysteine-rich low molecular weight metallothionein family member involved in protection against oxidative stress and chemotactic signal transduction		 	Midkine (MDK)	Heparin-binding growth factor induced during mid-gestation involved in cell migration, survival and angiogenesis		 	Minor-group human rhinovirus (HRV2)	Minor group rhinovirus		 	Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG)	Cell membrane glycoprotein involved in myelination		 	Myelin basic protein (MBP)	Major protein forming the myelin sheath of oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells		 	Nexin-1	Member of the serine protease inhibitor (Serpin) superfamily		 	Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1)	Serpin, Regulator of tPA/uPA activity		 	Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB PDGF receptor (PDGFR) β	PDGF-BB is a dimeric glycoprotein composed of two B subunits and a major growth factor that binds with high affinity to the cell surface receptor PDGFR β		 	Postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95)	Adaptor protein crucial for synapse stability and coupling to NMDA receptors		 	Prion protein (PrP)	Cell-surface glycoprotein that upon conversion can cause prion diseases		 	Pregnancy zone protein (PZP):protease complexes	PZP is a member of the α-2 globulin family; protease inhibitor and extracellular chaperone; role in immune regulation during pregnancy		 	Pro-urokinase	Serine protease, urokinase-type plasminogen activator single-chain zymogen with little intrinsic enzymatic activity		 	Pseudomonas exotoxin A	Toxin from Pseudomonas aeruginosa		 	Receptor-associated protein (RAP)	Endoplasmic reticulum resident chaperone glycoprotein, inhibits binding of ligands to low density lipoprotein receptor family members		 	Ricin A	Ribosome-inactivating protein found in the seeds of Ricinus communis; potent toxin		 	Saporin	Ribosome-inactivating protein found in the seeds of Saponaria officinalis; potent toxin		 	Saposin (SAP) precursor	Glycoprotein precursor of saposins (sphingolipid activator proteins) involved in glycosphingolipid catabolism		 	Shc	Adaptor protein that becomes phosphorylated on tyrosine residues in response to extracellular stimuli		 	Trigliceride-rich lipoproteins (TLRs)	Main carriers of triglycerides in the blood; involved in lipoprotein metabolism and transport		 	Tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteases (TIMPs)	Protease inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases		 	Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI)	Single-chain polypeptide that reversibly inhibits coagulation factor Xa, thereby regulating blood clotting		 	TpeL	Clostridium perfringens toxin		 	Transforming growth factor-β 1 (TGF-β 1)	Multifunctional growth factor, involved in interactions with extracellular proteins, cell growth, differentiation and vascular remodeling		 	Transforming growth factor-β 2 (TGF-β 2)	Multifunctional growth factor, involved in interactions with extracellular proteins, cell growth, differentiation and vascular remodeling		 	Thrombospondin 1	Extracellular matrix glycoprotein, member of the thrombospondin family, vital for cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions		 	Thrombospondin 2	Extracellular matrix glycoprotein, member of the thrombospondin family, vital for cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions		 	Tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA)	Serine protease mediating the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin and cell signaling		 	tPA:PAI-1 complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	tPA:neuroserpin complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Thrombin:protein inhibitor C complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Thrombin:nexin-1 complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Thrombin:antithrombin III complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Thrombin:heparin cofactor II complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Thrombin:PAI-1 complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Trichosanthin	Ribosome-inactivating protein derived from Trichosanthes kirilowii		 	Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA)	Serine protease, involved in tissue remodeling, wound healing, cell migration		 	uPA:PAI-1 complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	uPA:PAI-2 complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	uPA:C inhibitor complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	uPA:Nexin-1 complexes	Serine protease–protease inhibitor complex		 	Von Willebrand factor (vWF)	Adhesive, glycoprotein involved in blood coagulation and wound healing

As shown by), the Lrp1 β chain C-terminus contains motifs, proposed later by to be involved in generating the rapid endocytotic rate of Lrp1: two NPxY motifs, one YxxL motif and two di-leucine motifs. The C-terminus of Lrp1 interacts with many intracellular ligands and binds to endocytic and scaffold adaptors like disabled-1, FE-65 and postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95) that link the Lrp1 receptor to membrane-bound proteins such as amyloid precursor protein (APP) and are involved in many cell signaling pathways. Lrp1 can additionally undergo an intramembrane proteolysis that results in a shed extracellular Lrp1 fragment and a γ-secretase cleaved intracellular Lrp1 domain. Upon cleavage, the intracellular Lrp1 domain translocates to the cell nucleus and modulates gene expression.

Lrp1 is nowadays considered to be a multifunctional receptor: it is involved not only in ligand uptake, receptor-mediated endocytosis, cellular signaling and lipoprotein transport but also regulates cell surface protease activity, controls cellular entry and binding of toxins and viruses, participates in dendritic cell efferocytosis, protects against atherosclerosis, is critical for angiogenesis and the maintenance of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and acts on many signaling cascades including the Wnt and Notch pathways.

In the central nervous system (CNS), Lrp1 is highly expressed not only in neurons, astrocytes and microglia but also in brain endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, pericytes and the choroid plexus.

In the mouse, the complete knock-out of Lrp1 is lethal for the embryos, making it challenging to study the role and function of Lrp1 in embryonic as well as adult brain in vivo. However, various mutant mouse models generated in the last decades shed more light onto the possible function of Lrp1 in the CNS.

With their studies, and, highlight and support earlier findings showing that Lrp1 regulates postsynaptic signaling via interactions with PSD-95 and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) and is crucial for synaptic transmission. The studies of and additionally provide evidence for the importance of Lrp1 in maintaining proper brain lipid metabolism and leptin signaling and define Lrp1 as a major apolipoprotein E (ApoE) transport receptor, strengthening the role of Lrp1 in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis.

Knock-in mutations in the NPxY2 region lead to a reduced Lrp1 internalization rate and interfere with NMDAR recycling and NMDAR-mediated activation of the ERK1/2 pathway. Alterations in NMDAR subunits on the cell surface can lead to alterations and deficits in memory processes. Animals harboring the knock-in mutation in the NPxY2 motif display hyperactivity, impaired learning as well as deficits in spatial and reversal learning, similarly to animals with impaired NMDAR signaling.

A recent study from our laboratory discovered that Lrp1 is a novel carrier protein for Lewis X glycans expressed by mouse radial glial cells [neural stem precursor cells (NSPCs)] in the developing and adult CNS. With this and a follow-up study we showed that Lrp1 plays a role in the differentiation of NSPCs. The impaired differentiation of Lrp1-lacking NSPCs toward oligodendrocytes is supported by the work of where deficits in myelination and oligodendrocyte precursor differentiation were observed upon Lrp1 deletion specifically from the oligodendrocyte lineage. According to this study, these impairments are a combined result of altered AKT, sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2 and peroxisome proliferation-associated receptor γ pathways in oligodendrocytes.

The Extracellular Matrix

The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a biological substrate that is composed of collagens, proteoglycans and glycoproteins. The highly organized honeycomb-like structures of the ECM were first described by Camillo Golgi over a century ago and, since then, the ECM has been found to be essential not only for cell migration, adhesion and structural support but also for proper neuronal and glial development, BBB maturation and function, synaptogenesis and synaptic signaling in the CNS. The composition of the ECM is heterogeneous and tissue-specific. In the CNS, the ECM is formed by proteoglycans like heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans and glycoproteins including tenascins, laminins, and thrombospondins. During embryonic and early postnatal development, the ECM provides an environment supporting cell migration, differentiation and synapse formation. Here, the ECM forms a loose structure consisting of neuronal neurocan and matures simultaneously with synapses. In adult mice, neurocan expression becomes decreased while brevican, aggrecan, and tenascin R become upregulated.

Both ECM components released by neurons and astrocytes are essential for ECM generation. Such molecules tend to accumulate especially in ECM structures termed perineuronal nets (PNNs). These consist of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans, tenascin-R, hyaluronic acid and link proteins. PNNs are found predominantly on the soma and dendrites of parvalbumin-expressing GABAergic neurons, however, excitatory pyramidal neurons have also been shown to bear PNNs. Both PNN and ECM formation impairments are associated with neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders including epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease and schizophrenia. Hence, it is of importance to study not only how factors released by cells impact the ECM, but also how molecules and receptors located at the plasma membrane, Lrp1 included, interact with the ECM and modify its composition.

Lrp1 and Lipid Rafts

Lipid rafts are regions of the plasma membrane enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids that are involved in assembling protein complexes for cell signaling events. In the CNS, lipid rafts are essential for synaptic integrity and they are implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Although Lrp1 has been firstly found to localize nearly exclusively to coated pits in, for example, vascular smooth muscle cells, Lrp1 localization to caveolae, a specialized type of lipid rafts, was later shown by on the example of human fibroblasts. In neurons and neuronal-like PC12 and N2a cells, Lrp1 localizes, at least partially, to lipid rafts. Upon the disruption of lipid rafts by methyl-β-cyclodextrin, Lrp1-mediated signaling is impaired, while ligand binding and endocytosis capacities remain intact. The authors suggest that the presence of Lrp1 in lipid rafts in neuronal cells is due to the scaffolding activity of PSD-95. PSD-95 is a constituent protein of the post-synaptic complex in excitatory synapses and functions in stabilization of dendritic spines. Lrp1, similarly, is present at the synapse and is known to interact with PSD-95 and to affect NMDAR functioning, long-term potentiation (LTP) and synaptic signaling. A decrease in PSD-95 levels upon Lrp1 deletion has been previously reported for the hippocampi of the α CAMKII-Cre-Lrp1 KO mice. Simultaneous application of methyl-β-cyclodextrin with either enzymatically inactive tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) or active α-2-M to both PC12 cells and cultured cerebellar granule neurons, blocks neurite outgrowth, as does RAP application. The mechanism behind this effect has been traced to the fact that, in PC12 and N2a cells, upon treatment with these ligands, Lrp1 forms a complex with PSD-95 and NMDARs that activates tyrosine receptor kinase receptors, stimulates ERK1/2 activity and leads to various cellular responses, including neurite outgrowth. Interestingly, upon Lrp1 loss or blockage, a reduction in the formation, length, branching and outgrowth of neurites is found. Lrp1 is found essential also for neurite growth inhibition mediated by myelin associated-glycoprotein and CNS myelin and has been found to mediate myelin phagocytosis itself.

By a comparison of various cell types, proposed that the presence of Lrp1 in different plasma membrane compartments depends on the cell type analyzed, as does Lrp1-mediated signaling. For example, although in neuronal and neuronal-like cells Lrp1 is found both in lipid rafts and lipid raft-free membrane compartments, in vascular smooth muscle cells and CHO-K1 cells Lrp1 is present mostly in lipid raft-free membrane compartments. Lrp1 distribution in the cell membrane remains nevertheless dynamic, as the receptor can translocate from lipid-rafts to clathrin-coated pits where it undergoes endocytosis (Figure 2). The capacity of Lrp1 to shift between membrane compartments is influenced by plasma membrane microdomains and depends on available extracellular ligands. For example, insulin promotes Lrp1 localization to caveolae in mouse fibroblasts and adipocytes while platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB decreases it. As shown in the example of cultured hepatic cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), endocytosis of Lrp1 can also occur in lipid rafts. In this case, the kinesin-3 family motor protein, KIF3B, promotes caveolin-dependent endocytosis of Lrp1 by forming a complex with Lrp1 and utrophin, a cytoskeleton protein vital for adequate muscle functioning.

Lrp1 interacts with ligands located in lipid rafts and clathrin-coated pits. Lrp1 distribution in the cell membrane is dynamic: Lrp1 can be found in both lipid raft-containing and lipid raft-free membrane compartments (1). Lrp1-mediated endocytosis requires clathrin and is restricted to lipid raft-free regions (2). Lrp1 can interact with lipid raft-associated receptors and proteins, translocate back to lipid raft-free compartments and mediate the endocytosis of the bound ligand (3). The ligand undergoes either lysosomal or proteasomal degradation (4) while Lrp1 is recycled back to the membrane (5).

In the CNS, the localization of Lrp1 to both lipid rafts and clathrin-coated pits has been proposed to be one of the mechanisms enabling a separation of Lrp1 endocytic and signaling activities and their independent regulation. For example, PDGF-BB via the PDGF receptor (PDGFR) β and the Src is required for mediating the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic tail of Lrp1. This interaction occurs only when Lrp1 is located to lipid rafts and therefore modulates Lrp1-dependent cell signaling in specific cell compartments.

Taken together, interactions between Lrp1, the plasma membrane and ECM molecules highlight the presence of a heterogeneous modulation of Lrp1-dependent cell signaling in specific cell compartments and cell types.

Lrp1 Interactions With ECM Molecules

Given the multitude of Lrp1 ligands, it is not surprising that ECM molecules also interact with Lrp1. Lrp1 is primarily responsible for the endocytosis and subsequent transport of extracellular proteins to lysosomes. Although Lrp1-mediated endocytosis occurs in non-lipid raft areas via clathrin-coated pits, due to the receptors’ mobility, GPI proteins like the prion protein and other proteins associated with lipid rafts can also undergo Lrp1-clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Protein complexes and membrane-associated receptors are also Lrp1 ligands. With their endocytosis, Lrp1 further impacts on the protein composition of the plasma membrane and the ECM.

Although Lrp1’s main function remains the endocytosis of extracellular ligands, it regulates the composition of the ECM also by controlling messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression and stability. In this way Lrp1 balances the protein levels of, for example, type III collagen, pigment epithelium-derived factor and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) receptor (uPAR)/Endo-180 in MEFs.

Lrp1 and HSPGs

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are core constituents of the ECM implemented in ECM integrity and in facilitating the entry of molecules including morphogens, growth factors and viruses. Some protein ligands of Lrp1 are shown to bind with low affinity to glycosaminoglycan chains of surface HSPGs that in turn facilitate binding to and Lrp1-mediated endocytosis of these proteins. Consistent with such a mechanism, the endocytosis of such proteins is blocked by heparin and heparitinase and does not occur in cells lacking HSPGs. HSPGs can be cleaved by heparanase-1, an enzyme that requires a proteolytic cleavage to become active. This process is partly dependent on Lrp1-mediated internalization of the inactive pro-enzyme. Interestingly, both Lrp1 and HSPGs are required for the endocytosis of mature heparanase-1.

A summary of Lrp1 interactions with the HSPGs described in this section is presented in Figure 3, 4.

Lrp1 interacts with heparan sulfate proteoglycans. (A) Lrp1 and heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are responsible for the independent endocytosis of distinct trigliceride-rich lipoproteins (TRLs) in the liver. (B) Lrp1 association with HSPGs determines the availability of lipoprotein binding sites, such that upon the dissociation of Lrp1 from HSPGs, more binding sites appear.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans act as bridging molecules. Various ligands, including connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and the prion protein, have been shown to bind to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) (1). After association with HSPGs, the binding of the ligand to Lrp1 is facilitated and Lrp1-mediated endocytosis is triggered (2). Upon endocytosis, the molecules are transported to lysosomes/proteasomes for degradation (3) and Lrp1 is recycled back to the membrane (4). The depicted processes are inhibited both by blockage of Lrp1 and HSPGs.

In the liver, Lrp1 was previously shown to clear trigliceride-rich lipoproteins either independently or as a coreceptor with HSPGs. A recent study questioned this idea and suggested instead that Lrp1 and HSPGs are rather responsible for independent clearing of distinct trigliceride-rich lipoproteins.

Lrp1 has been proposed to regulate the availability of lipoprotein binding sites by associating with HSPGs. Upon Lrp1 dissociation from HSPGs, more lipoprotein binding sites are revealed, and lipoprotein particle clearance becomes enhanced. These findings were among the first to imply a role for Lrp1 firstly as a mediator of various signaling pathways, independent of its endocytic function and secondly as a regulator of HSPG function. HSPGs were also proposed by the same study to play an active role in lipoprotein uptake. So far, Lrp1 and HSPGs have been shown to mediate the uptake of a complement inhibitor, the C4b-binding protein, the coagulation factor VIII, cellular prion protein, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and thrombospondin. HSPGs are furthermore found essential for the binding of protease Nexin-1 to Lrp1. Although the internalization of complexed (e.g., with tPA and uPA) and free Nexin-1 is mediated by Lrp1, it can be partially substituted by an Lrp1-independent pathway. In Lrp1 deficient cells, the HSPG syndecan-1 takes over the internalization of free Nexin-1 and results in the activation of the Ras-ERK pathway instead of the PKA pathway that becomes active upon Lrp1-mediated internalization. Given that Nexin-1 is involved in the regulation of extracellular proteolytic activity, the efficiency of its uptake and cellular responses triggered upon its internalization are crucial, especially for tumor cell invasiveness studies.

Another HSPG member involved in Lrp1-mediated endocytosis is glypican-3. Glypican-3 has been shown to regulate embryonic growth by inhibiting the Hedgehog signaling pathway. The binding of Hedgehog to glypican-3 triggers Hedgehog:glypican-3 complex endocytosis and degradation, impacting Hedgehog availability for binding with Patched. Mechanistically, although glypican-3 and Sonic Hedgehog can directly bind to Lrp1, endocytosis is suggested to occur only upon simultaneous glypican-3 and Sonic Hedgehog interaction with Lrp1. This mechanism is found in MEFs and breast cancer cells, indicating a general role for Lrp1 and HSPGs in Hedgehog signaling.

Lrp1 and Amyloid β

In neuronal cells, APP processing pathways are heterogeneous. In the non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP undergoes an α-and γ-secretase-mediated cleavage that leads to the generation of the soluble α APP fragment and APP C-terminal fragments. When APP is processed in this way, no amyloid β is generated. In contrast, in the amyloidogenic pathway, upon APP cleavage by the β-secretase BACE1 and γ-secretases, amyloid β is produced together with the soluble β APP and APP C-terminal fragments. Depending on the position of the cleavage, two principal forms of amyloid β can be generated: amyloid β with 40 amino acid residues and amyloid β with 42 amino acid residues. Both forms of amyloid β are released outside the cell in response to normal synaptic signaling and are incorporated into the ECM. The majority of produced amyloid β is the shorter form. If the longer amyloid β form is produced, it exhibits a higher tendency to form fibrils and later on amyloid plaques that fail to be cleared and therefore accumulate in the brain parenchyma. Amyloid β overproduction, increased processing, aggregation and deposition in the form of plaques leads to neurotoxicity and neurodegeneration and is considered central for Alzheimer’s disease development. It should be noted that, together with amyloid β, various ECM proteins are found in plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, for example ECM-located and cell-surface HSPGs. In this respect, ECM molecules have been analyzed and grouped with regard to the amyloid β form they interact with by. The proteins investigated in this study included reelin, integrins, laminins and collagens. These authors and others showed that fibrillar and oligomeric forms of amyloid β can diversely interact with ECM and membrane proteins, influencing cell homeostasis.

For the CNS, the importance of amyloid β generation and its multiplex interactions with the ECM are highlighted by studies showing that the ECM regulates APP levels in fibroblasts and neuronal cells, amyloid β induces ECM degradation in rat astrocytes and that both fibrillar and oligomeric forms of amyloid β associate with proteins present at synapses, a characteristic closely related to synapse loss and neurodegeneration observed in Alzheimer’s disease.

In the CNS, Lrp1 interacts with soluble and transmembrane forms of APP and impacts their internalization, processing and transactivation (Figure 5). Upon Lrp1 loss in fibroblasts and CHO cells, APP degradation and trafficking is impaired. An introduction of a truncated, intracellular domain of Lrp1 to these cells is sufficient to restore APP processing and amyloid β production. Furthermore, the presence of a functional Lrp1 on the cell surface was shown to reduce the amount of soluble α APP produced and to favor amyloidogenic processing of APP.

Lrp1 is crucial for the uptake and processing of amyloid precursor protein. The cytoplasmic tail of Lrp1 interacts with the cytoplasmic tail of amyloid precursor protein (APP) via the bridging molecule FE-65. This results in the endocytosis of the Lrp1:APP:FE-65 complex (1) and subsequent proteolysis of APP by the enzyme BACE1 and proteinase presenilin-1 (PS1), which is part of the γ-secretase complex (2). The proteolysis results in the generation of soluble β APP and amyloid β peptides that are released outside the cell in recycling vesicles, like Lrp1 (3). The cytoplasmic tail of APP, after γ-secretase cleavage, forms a complex with FE-65 that interacts with the transcriptional modulator Tip60 (4). This complex translocates to the nucleus where it suppresses the transcription of the Lrp1 promoter, influencing Lrp1-mediated processes (5). Upon γ-secretase-mediated cleavage of Lrp1 (6), its cytoplasmic tail can influence APP processing by competing with the intracellular domain of APP complexed with FE-65 for binding with Tip60 in the nucleus (7). After β-secretase cleavage, the shed extracellular domain of Lrp1 can bind to amyloid β peptides and enhance their clearance (8).

As Lrp1 and APP are both substrates for γ- and β-secretases, Lrp1 not only stimulates but also interferes with the processing of APP. APP cleavage is favored when both Lrp1 and APP are present; however, upon Lrp1 overexpression, the cleavage of APP becomes impaired because Lrp1 competes with APP for binding to BACE1. Upon γ-secretase-mediated cleavage of Lrp1, the intracellular domain translocates to the nucleus and impacts APP-mediated signaling by interacting with the transcriptional modulator, Tip60. Lrp1 expression is regulated by APP itself as the APP:FE-65:Tip60 complex is able to suppress the transcription of the Lrp1 promoter. As a consequence, in fibroblasts of APP knock-out mice Lrp1 expression is increased. Interestingly, increased levels of APP can lead to a decreased production of shed Lrp1, impairing amyloid β clearance.

Fibrils of amyloid β do not accumulate in excessive amounts in healthy individuals due to several efficient clearance mechanisms: extracellular proteolysis, BBB transport, efflux of soluble amyloid β to the peripheral circulation and receptor-mediated endocytosis. Lrp1 is vital for the production, internalization and catabolism of amyloid β (Figure 5, 6), and in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients, according to some studies, Lrp1 levels are significantly reduced.

Lrp1 is a receptor mediating amyloid β uptake. Lrp1 can regulate the internalization of amyloid β in several ways. Amyloid β can directly interact with ligand-binding domains of Lrp1 (1). Amyloid β can interact with several molecules including α-2-macroglobulin (α-2-M), apolipoprotein E (ApoE) and heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), which bridge it to Lrp1 and facilitate its endocytosis (2). Upon endocytosis, amyloid β can either undergo degradation (3) or, to a smaller extent, be recycled back to the extracellular space (4). Lrp1 can also influence signaling pathways, especially the RhoA pathway that can facilitate amyloid β clearance by stimulating actin polymerization (5). The shed extracellular domain of Lrp1 additionally sequesters soluble amyloid β present at the blood-brain barrier and in the circulation (6).

Amyloid β has so far been shown to form complexes with ApoE, lactoferrin, prion protein and activated α-2-M that undergo Lrp1-mediated endocytosis. Monomeric forms of amyloid β can also bind directly to the extracellular ligand-binding domains of Lrp1 and undergo endocytosis. Microglia were shown to migrate to plaques and engulf amyloid β predominantly via micropinocytosis. Lrp1-mediated amyloid β clearance in pericytes helps prevent amyloid β deposition in the cerebrovasculature. Lrp1 expressed on the surface of endothelial cells at the BBB mediates rapid clearance of amyloid β from the brain parenchyma via transcytosis and degradation. In the periphery, β-secretase cleaved, shed, soluble Lrp1 can bind amyloid β, further enhancing its clearance from the brain. Supporting amyloid β removal via Lrp1 from the system are the liver, spleen, and kidney. Lrp1 impacts amyloid β metabolism also by activating signaling pathways. By modulating RhoA signaling in Schwann cells, Lrp1 influences cell adhesion and migration. RhoA has been shown to facilitate dynamin-dependent amyloid β endocytosis in neuronal cells. It is thereby proposed that Lrp1 could activate RhoA and facilitate RhoA-dependent endocytosis of amyloid β. HSPGs have been identified to be required for the binding of amyloid β and act as a coreceptor for Lrp1 in the process of neuronal amyloid β uptake. Astrocytic Lrp1 has also been shown to be essential for the uptake and degradation of amyloid β. Whether Lrp1 requires HSPGs for amyloid β uptake also in this cell type remains to be elucidated, however, it is suggested that astrocytic Lrp1 affects the degradation of amyloid β in the ECM by modulating the levels of matrix metalloprotease (MMP)-2 and MMP-9.

In summary, although the involvement of Lrp1 in APP and amyloid β processing and Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis is undeniable, given the complexity of interactions, their true nature may be hidden by the variability in cell lines and the systems used, and is still yet to be fully unraveled.

Impact of Lrp1 on Cell Adhesion, Migration and Cell Signaling

The ECM is vital for many cellular processes including cell proliferation, survival, differentiation and migration. In order for the cell to migrate, the ECM surrounding it needs to be degraded. This is performed by a variety of proteases including MMPs and serine proteases and tightly controlled by their inhibitors. Both uPA and tPA proteases mediate for example the activation of plasminogen to plasmin that leads to the digestion of the ECM and MMP activation. One of the first reports showing Lrp1 involvement in ECM turnover and cell migration was published by. Here, by using a Transwell filter migration assay, the authors discovered that the presence of Lrp1 facilitates the migration of smooth muscle cells on fibronectin-coated filters. These observations were reproduced by. The stimulating effect of Lrp1 was not apparent when smooth muscle cells were tested on a collagen gel invasion assay, indicating that the effects of Lrp1 depend on the composition of the matrix. The addition of uPA, tPA or α -2-M—potent Lrp1 ligands—to the cells is found to be stimulatory for cell migration, neurite outgrowth and axon elongation.

Lrp1 directly interacts with uPA and the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). As the binding affinity of PAI-1 and uPA alone is lower than when in a complex with the uPAR, Lrp1-mediated endocytosis occurs only after PAI-1 binds to the uPA:uPAR complex. By the binding and subsequent endocytosis of such complexes, Lrp1 reduces uPAR levels on the cell surface. In this manner, Lrp1 regulates uPAR-mediated proteolysis of the ECM and impacts plasminogen conversion to plasmin. By regulating uPAR levels on the cell surface and decreasing uPA-mediated plasminogen activation, Lrp1 inhibits fibronectin remodeling. By regulating uPAR levels, Lrp1 also influences plasmin-mediated cleavage of ECM glycoproteins lacking collagen in their composition, as well as plasmin-dependent activation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 that degrade the ECM by cleaving collagens.

Upon Lrp1 silencing from MEFs, collagen remodeling is increased. This occurs independently of the membrane type-1 matrix metalloprotease (MT1-MMP), a metalloprotease previously shown to impact collagen remodeling and Lrp1 cleavage in malignant cells. As upon treatment of MT1-MMP-deficient and wild type skin fibroblasts with RAP collagen remodeling becomes enhanced in both cell types, it hints at the presence of an MT1-MMP-independent pathway that becomes active upon Lrp1 signal blockade.

PAI-1 facilitated migration in rat smooth muscle cells is Lrp1-dependent. Interaction of the extracellular heat shock protein 90 with Lrp1 activates Akt 1/2 kinases that facilitate the migration of skin cells to the wound and promote its closure. Lrp1 was shown to interact with PDGFR β and regulate PDGFR β cell surface levels and PDGFR β signaling which is of importance, among others, for the integrity of vascular walls and cell chemotaxis.

Actin organization and cell migration in smooth muscle cells are, for example, controlled by PDGFR β phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation that is Lrp1-dependent. The interaction of PDGF β with Lrp1 can also result in the activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade—a major player in cell survival and proliferation.

Mouse embryonic fibroblasts respond with migratory behavior on fibronectin and vitronectin matrixes upon interaction of thrombospondin 1 and the calreticulin:Lrp1 complex. The impaired cell migration observed upon Lrp1 loss in MEFs was suggested by to be a result of improper lamellipodia generation in Lrp1-deficient cells.

Cell migration is also regulated by Lrp1 via blockage of the effect of stimulatory ligands. This is the case for ApoE, which has been shown to inhibit PDGF-B-dependent smooth muscle cell migration by binding to Lrp1. This interaction results in the activation of protein kinase A and increase in intracellular cAMP levels and is of particular importance for protection against vascular disease. ApoE-deficient mice exhibit atherosclerosis, while Lrp1 loss from smooth muscle cells enhances vascular cell activation and also leads to atherosclerosis.

detected moreover that MEFs that lacked Lrp1 and were plated on serum-, vitronectin-, and fibronectin-coated plates migrated faster than wild type MEFs upon subjection to a scratch assay in the presence of PDGF-BB. This effect was not detectable on Matrigel- and type I collagen-plated cells, highlighting the varying effects of Lrp1 in different matrices. The increased migration capacities of MEFs lacking Lrp1 were suggested by the study to be a result of increased surface levels of the uPAR in these cells. As mentioned earlier, Lrp1 can bind PAI-1:uPA:uPAR complexes and facilitate their endocytosis. This in turn leads to altered levels of the uPAR on the cell surface. When cultured under high serum conditions, fibroblasts lacking Lrp1 show increased levels of Rac, a GTPase vital for lamellipodia formation and cell spreading. In the Lrp1-deficient MEFs, analyzed in the study of, elevated migration is proposed to be a result of persistent Rac activity and/or increased proteolysis. This reasoning is in agreement with studies showing that, by interacting with proteases, Lrp1 protects ECM proteins from degradation.

A requirement enabling the cell to migrate is the restructuring or disassembly of integrin-linked focal adhesion complexes. Focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by ECM proteins including thrombospondin 1 and 2. Thrombospondins are large oligomeric ECM proteins that participate in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions by binding to other ECM molecules, cytokines and cell surface receptors. Thrombospondins are considered vital for the development of the CNS, as a lack of thrombospondins 1/2 impairs astrocyte-mediated synaptogenesis and a lack of thrombospondin 1 impairs neural progenitor proliferation and neuronal differentiation in vivo and in vitro. Thrombospondin 1 has been shown to interact with Lrp1, HSPGs, calreticulin and integrins in various cell types.

Thrombospondins favor cell migration by disassembling and detaching focal adhesions from the ECM—processes dependent on calreticulin and Lrp1 and requiring intact lipid rafts. Both the intact thrombospondin 1 and its cleaved N-terminal domain mediate focal adhesion disassembly. The sequence responsible for this effect and binding to calreticulin is located in the N-terminal domain of thrombospondin 1, and a peptide mimetic termed hep I was developed to specifically study interactions of this thrombospondin 1 domain. The signaling mediated by thrombospondin 1 via the calreticulin-Lrp1 complex is a process independent of Lrp1-mediated thrombospondin 1 endocytosis (Figure 7A). Although the sequence responsible for the binding of thrombospondin 1 to Lrp1 and subsequent endocytosis is also located to the N-terminal domain, it does not include the sequence mimicked by hep I, as hep I lacks Lrp1 binding capacity. Interactions of the calreticulin:Lrp1 complex with thrombospondin 1 have been evidenced to result in a temporary association of the G protein α i-2 subunit with Lrp1. This interaction results in FAK and Src phosphorylation (Thy-1-dependent) and activation of ERK, PI3K, and RhoA inactivation and favors cell migration. These events do not occur upon either loss of calreticulin or Lrp1.

Lrp1 interacts with thrombospondins. (A) Upon binding of thrombospondin 1 to calreticulin, its binding to Lrp1 is facilitated. The Lrp1:calreticulin complex leads to the association of the G protein αi2 that in turn phosphorylates FAK and Src. Required for the effect of thrombospondin on Src activation is additionally the GPI-linked protein Thy-1. The activation of Src and FAK further activates the ERK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways and leads to the downregulation of RhoA, focal adhesion disassembly and cell migration. (B) Thrombospondins can function as bridging molecules, enabling Lrp1-mediated endocytosis of various molecules, including Notch, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).

Thrombospondins also function as bridging molecules between Lrp1 and its extracellular ligands that facilitate their clearance (Figure 7B). Thrombospondin 1 was found to participate in the clearance of vascular endothelial growth factor via Lrp1 in the ovary.

Notch signaling is crucial for proper development, hair pigmentation and homeostasis, and mediates short-range, direct communications between neighboring cells. Lrp1 facilitates Notch 3 trans-endocytosis and thrombospondin 2-mediated potentiation of Notch 3 signaling, highlighting that the ECM is involved in the modulation of Notch function, and Lrp1 and thrombospondins support non-cell autonomous short-range signaling.

The activity of MMPs, adamalysin-like metalloproteinases with thrombospondin domains and membrane-anchored adamalysins, is tightly regulated by four members of the tissue inhibitors of the MMPs (TIMPs) family. In the TIMP family, TIMP3 is unique as it controls the activity of all three metalloproteinase classes. The lack of TIMP3 leads to excessive ECM turnover caused by uncontrolled proteinase activity. TIMP3 extracellular levels are regulated by Lrp1-mediated endocytosis. The shed, soluble Lrp1 competes with cell-surface Lrp1 for TIMP binding and results in increased extracellular levels of TIMP, promoting its inhibitory action.

In addition, Lrp1 mediates the endocytosis of MMP-2, MMP-9, and MMP-13 and adamalysin-like metalloproteinases with thrombospondin domains 4 and 5, preventing their proteolytic and signaling functions. Thrombospondin 1/2 was also evidenced to interact with MMP-2 and MMP-9. Upon binding of pro-MMP-2 to thrombospondin 2, the complex associates with Lrp1 and undergoes endocytosis, which can be blocked by an anti-thrombospondin 1 antibody.

MMP-2 activity favors angiogenesis and endothelial cell invasion in malignant gliomas. In thrombospondin 2 knock-out mice, microvessel density is enhanced and MMP-2 levels are significantly upregulated. MMP-2 levels and invasion capabilities of microvessel endothelial cells in these mice are reduced upon addition of thrombospondin 2. This effect is blocked by downregulating Lrp1. Curiously, the endocytosis of pro-MMP-2 can also take place by formation of complexes with TIMP-2 and is Lrp1-dependent. This interaction, however, does not require thrombospondin.

Vital for the normal function of elastic arteries are collagens and elastins, prominent members of the ECM. It is appreciated that excess protease activity can contribute to the elastic fiber degradation in these vessels. Smooth muscle cells are essential for establishment of proper vessel diameter, correct deposition of the ECM and assembly of elastic fibers. The deletion of Lrp1 from the embryo proper results in severe impairments in investment of vessels with pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells. The deletion of Lrp1 from vascular smooth muscle cells leads to increased proliferation and aneurysms. The deletion of Lrp1 from smooth muscle cells also impacts the integrity of the vasculature by altering PDGFR β signaling and levels of various ECM molecules pivotal for proper vessel development, contributing to the development of hypertension, atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular diseases. Alongside a lack of Lrp1 in smooth muscle cells, matrix decomposition becomes dysregulated due to CTGF protein level upregulation. CTGF accumulation is traced to the missing Lrp1-mediated clearance of CTGF. Lrp1-mediated endocytosis of CTGF occurs tissue-independently as it has also been shown to take place in the liver. The disrupted elastin fiber architecture and ECM disorganization upon Lrp1 deletion from smooth muscle cells was found by to increase protein levels of MMP-2, MMP-9, MT1-MMP, and serine protease high-temperature requirement factor A1 (HtrA1). HtrA1 is abundant in smooth muscle cells, degrades many ECM proteins including aggrecan, fibulin-5 and collagens and has been previously associated with disorganized elastic fibers. Lrp1 was found by to regulate the levels of HtrA1 in the vessel wall by rapid endocytosis of this protease, thereby impacting vessel wall integrity.

In conclusion, the presence of different tissue-dependent Lrp1-mediated mechanisms for serine protease and MMP

clearance highlights that Lrp1-mediated uptake and degradation provides a vital mechanism for limiting excessive extracellular proteolytic activity. By eliciting control over MMP extracellular levels, Lrp1 additionally modifies cell adhesion and migration capabilities that are crucial not only for processes like wound healing and angiogenesis but also for tumor growth. For example, EGF-mediated downregulation of Lrp1 activity in astrocytic tumors impacts ECM composition and may contribute to tumor invasiveness.

Lrp1 Binding to and Regulation of Integrins

Integrins are transmembrane glycoprotein receptors consisting of α and β heterodimers. Integrins have been implemented in molecular adhesion, cell survival and migration.

The process of binding of integrins to the ECM provokes a change in conformation of integrins that connects the ECM with the cell and leads to adhesion. An integrin that is especially crucial for triggering the cell-matrix interactions is β1 integrin. β1 integrin outside-in signaling leads to integrin recruitment and clustering, phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase and the assembly of focal adhesions, promoting cell spreading and adhesion.

Fibronectin is a ubiquitous and multifunctional ECM protein vital for cell adhesion, migration and differentiation. Lrp1 participates in the catabolism of fibronectin by mediating fibronectin endocytosis. In particular, Lrp1 prevents fibronectin upregulation on the cell surface and in the cell-secreted medium, as shown for MEFs and Chinese Hamster ovary cells.

Tissue transglutaminase is a ubiquitously expressed Ca2+-dependent protein crosslinking enzyme present in the cytoplasm, at the cell surface and in the ECM. Fibronectin and β integrins are major interaction partners of tissue transglutaminase that impact on cell adhesion and migration (Figure 8). Fibronectin, aside from being internalized in an Lrp1-dependent manner, also acts as a bridging molecule and enhances Lrp1-mediated surface tissue transglutaminase endocytosis.

Lrp1 is vital for integrin signaling and function. Integrins are formed by α and β heterodimers. Fibronectin and integrins can interact with tissue transglutaminase (tTG) and impact on cell migration and adhesion. Upon fibronectin binding, surface tTG is endocytosed by Lrp1 (1). tTG mediates the formation of Lrp1:integrin complexes that facilitate integrin endocytosis and cell migration (2). Interaction of tTG with integrins stabilizes fibronectin:integrin complexes and stimulates RhoA activation and cell adhesion (3).

Interaction of tissue transglutaminase with β integrins results in the formation of fibronectin-tissue transglutaminase-integrin complexes that stabilize the interactions of fibronectin with integrins. The interaction of tissue transglutaminase with integrins facilitates their clustering and activates RhoA.

Surface tissue transglutaminase has been recently shown to associate with Lrp1 and promote the formation of β1 integrin-Lrp1 complexes. As tissue transglutaminase associates with integrins, they are internalized by Lrp1 as a complex, resulting in a modification of cell-matrix interactions. Upon Lrp1 loss, transglutaminase activity of surface tissue transglutaminase is upregulated and cell adhesion enhanced.

Fibulin-5 is an ECM integrin-binding protein that is involved in elastic fiber formation. The binding of fibulin-5 to uPA stimulates plasminogen activation. This leads to the proteolysis of fibulin-5, its dissociation from integrins and stimulation of β1 integrin-mediated migration of MEFs, independently of the uPAR. found, however, that if uPARs are associated with integrins and the uPA:PAI-1 complex binds to such an uPAR, integrins are internalized by Lrp1 together with the uPA:PAI-1:uPAR complex, influencing integrin functioning.

Lrp1 promotes β1 integrin activation via kindlin 2 and is considered to be a driver for the trafficking and proteasomal and lysosomal degradation of endocytosed activated β1 integrin via the protein kinase C (Figure 9A). Knock-in mutations in the intracellular NPxY2 motif of Lrp1, similarly to the knock-out of Lrp1, lead to elevated levels of immature β1 integrin on the cell surface, disrupting β1 integrin functionality. Immature β1 integrin lacks the full glycosylation pattern that is acquired in the endoplasmic apparatus and the Golgi complex. Changes in glycosylation patterns are known to disturb transit through the Golgi apparatus, formation of complexes with α integrin subunits and ligand-binding affinities. Knock-in mutations in the intracellular NPxY2 motif of Lrp1 lead moreover to reduced β1 integrin recycling and cause increased cell adhesion to collagen and fibronectin matrices and reduced cell migration of MEFs. This effect is due to the fact that the impaired Lrp1 endocytosis of β1 integrin leads to increased numbers of focal adhesions, increased focal adhesion kinase phosphorylation status and decreased MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity in MEFs and neurons (Figure 9B).

Lrp1 mediates β1 integrin endocytosis. (A) The NPxY2 motif located in the cytoplasmic domain of Lrp1 is responsible for the endocytosis of β1 integrins via kindlin 2 that enhances cell migration. (B) Upon mutations in the NPxY2 motif of Lrp1, interactions with kindlin 2 do not occur, resulting in reduced β1 integrin recycling and facilitation of cell adhesion.

Interactions of Lrp1 with β1 integrin are proposed to be similar to Lrp1 interactions with APP. The knock-in mutation in the intracellular NPxY2 motif of Lrp1 leads to surface accumulation of not only β1 integrin but also APP. β1 integrin and APP are also endocytosed together by Lrp1 upon complex formation with the scaffolding protein Ran-binding protein 9, an interaction of importance for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis and synaptic plasticity.

In the CNS, β1 integrin is known for participating in neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth, however, its function is not limited to cell adhesion and migration. β1 integrin is expressed by NSPCs and is vital for the formation of cell layers in the cerebral cortex. An in vivo conditional deletion of β1 integrin in radial glia cells leads to spontaneous seizures and reactive astrogliosis. β1 integrin presence is put forward as being inhibitory for astrocyte differentiation in adult hippocampal neural stem cells as well as in embryonic neural stem cells. This inhibitory effect is mediated via the integrin-linked kinase and appears to be more prominent in female mice, as shown by. Interestingly, integrin-linked kinase, as a major downstream effector kinase of β1 integrin signaling, is vital for ECM deposition and controls its expression.

In a different β1 integrin mutant, β1 integrin loss restricted to astrocytes has been found to impact endothelial cell number at the neurovascular unit, blood vessel branching and aquaporin 4 levels. Given that Lrp1 is found on astrocytes and contributes to vessel development as well as BBB integrity it is of interest for future studies to elucidate to what extent Lrp1 participates in β1 integrin-mediated effects in the developing CNS.

As Lrp1 was recently identified as a receptor for β1 integrins also in thyroid cancer cells, Lrp1 and integrins emerge as potential candidate genes for preventing cancer invasiveness.

Lrp1 has also been shown to bind β2 integrins located on leukocytes and monocytes. The interactions of Lrp1 with β2 integrins are suggested to modulate cell adhesion and migration by regulating integrin recycling, as shown in the example of macrophages. Hypercholesterolemia is proposed to induce hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPC) proliferation and their migration into lesioned sites, where they are suggested to undergo differentiation into leukocytes and form plaques found in arteriosclerosis patients. Vital for HSPC adhesion, migration and homing is β2 integrin. Loss of Lrp1 does not influence expression levels of β2 integrin, but leads to inhibition of HSPC adhesion, suggesting Lrp1 in this context impacts β2 integrin functioning.

Lrp1 Interactions With tPA

Tissue plasminogen activator is a serine protease that belongs to the chymotrypsin family, mostly known for its role in degrading the extracellular matrix components via activating plasmin. This glycoprotein is built up from the heavy A-chain and the light B-chain (Figure 10). The heavy A-chain is composed of the finger domain, EGF-like domain and Kringle 1 and 2 domains. The finger domain is responsible for binding to fibrin and the membrane receptors Annexin II and Lrp1. The EGF-like domain is crucial for binding to the EGF receptor. The Kringle 1 domain is involved in the uptake of tPA in the liver and the Kringle 2 domain is vital for interactions with NMDARs and PDGFs. The light B-chain comprises the serine protease domain with the catalytic triad (His322, Asp371, and Ser478), responsible for the proteolytic activity of tPA.

The structure of tissue plasminogen activator. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), like all serine proteases, exists in two forms: the single-chain and the two-chain form. The conformation of tPA is maintained by 17 disulfide bridges (green double lines). The structure of both tPA forms consists of two chains: the A-chain and the B-chain. The A-chain consists of four domains that are color-coded on the scheme. The finger domain (red) is responsible for interacting with Lrp1, fibrin and annexin II. The EGF-like domain (blue) binds the EGF receptor. The kringle 1 domain (green) mediates tPA uptake in the liver. The kringle 2 domain (violet) is vital for interactions with NMDARs and PDGFs. The B-chain (black) consists of the catalytic triad that mediates the proteolytic activity of tPA. The single-chain form of tPA is catalytically active and can be further cleaved by kallikrein and plasmin (red double lines), resulting in the two-chain form of tPA. The two-chain tPA is also catalytically active.

Unlike other members of the chymotrypsin family, tPA is secreted as a proteolytically active single chain form that can be subsequently processed into the equally proteolytically active two-chain tPA by plasmin or kallikrein. Given its prominent matrix degradation capacities, tPA levels and activity must be strictly regulated. In the CNS, Lrp1 together with protease inhibitors PAI-1 and neuroserpin is especially crucial for controlling the effect of tPA on ECM remodeling.

For many years, tPA has been mostly appreciated for its fibrinolytic activity, however, it possesses a plethora of other functions vital for CNS homeostasis, some of which are summarized in Figure 11.

Representative functions of tissue plasminogen activator in the CNS. (A) At the synapse, upon binding of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), Lrp1 recruits postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95). PSD-95 bridges the NPxY2 motif of Lrp1 and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR). NMDAR allows Ca2+ influx, leading to an activation of signaling cascades (1). TPA can directly interact with the NMDAR, enhancing its extrasynaptic surface diffusion and resulting in excitotoxicity (2). Interactions of low levels of single-chain tPA (sc-tPA) and two-chain tPA (tc-tPA) with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) result in neuroprotection and inhibition of NMDAR neurotoxicity (3). Interactions of tPA with synaptic GluN2A-NMDARs are neuroprotective, while with extrasynaptic GluN2D-NMDARs, neurotoxic (4). (B) During corticogenesis, tPA released by migrating neuroblasts clusters NMDARs on radial glia cells and ensures proper cortical migration and maturation of neurons. (C) TPA enhances blood-brain barrier permeability by interacting with astrocytic Lrp1 and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-CC. (D) Both sc-tPA and tc-tPA are proteolytically active and convert plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin digests fibrin, a process especially vital for renewing blood flow after ischemia (1). Plasmin cleaves GluN2A and GluN2B-containing NMDARs, impacting NMDAR functionality (2).

TPA, alike Lrp1, is implicated in the pathology of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease, psychotic disorders like schizophrenia and is recognized for supporting BBB integrity.

The tPA has been found to facilitate neurite outgrowth by promoting local proteolysis and to favor neuronal (synaptic) maturation after differentiation from cortical neural progenitor cells. TPA is highly expressed in brain regions undergoing cellular migration. TPA gene expression is found most prominently in the cerebellum in the period of neuronal migration and is induced in granule neurons leaving the external granule layer of the cerebellum. Mice that lack tPA show an increased amount of granule neurons migrating in the molecular layer of the cerebellum. The mechanism behind enhanced tPA expression in granule cells is suggested to be related to NMDAR signaling as these receptors are crucial for granule cell migration. TPA-mediated signaling is also supportive for Schwann cell migration via direct interaction with NMDARs and is present even upon blockage of Lrp1. Recently, tPA has been implicated in the control of proper radial glial cell organization and differentiation. The interaction between neuronal tPA and NMDAR on radial glia cells was found to be crucial for proper cortical migration and maturation. In a mouse model of Fragile X syndrome, a stimulating effect of tPA on Fmr1-deficient cells migrating out of neurospheres was also apparent.

TPA and plasmin have been shown to regulate mossy fiber outgrowth in the hippocampus via the proteolysis of the proteoglycan DSD-1/phosphacan.

In murine renal and non-renal myofibroblasts, tPA promotes transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1-mediated activation and ECM production which is independent of its proteolytic activity. TPA exerts this action by directly activating Lrp1 by a phosphorylation of tyrosine residues located in the C-terminus of Lrp1. This process results in Lrp1-mediated β1 integrin recruitment and integrin-linked kinase signaling. Upon Lrp1 loss, tPA fails to induce myofibroblast activation and ECM overproduction as evidenced by type I collagen expression. TGF-β1 fibrogenic activity is not disturbed in Lrp1-deficient cells, suggesting Lrp1 loss affects only tPA-mediated signaling. In other cell types, however, Lrp1 was shown to impact TGF-β expression and signaling, for example during vessel wall remodeling.

TPA is not only supportive of cell migration, but, under certain conditions, it also favors cell adhesion. This effect is reversed upon binding of tPA to PAI-1, which induces an Lrp1-mediated internalization of the adhesion complex and cell detachment.

Extracellular matrix remodeling by tPA and other proteases is not only involved in axonal growth and cell migration but also activates cellular signaling cascades. For example, degraded fibronectin particles interact with integrin receptors and trigger cell signaling that further remodels the ECM by regulating mRNA levels of metalloproteases and other factors. TPA also acts as a cytokine by upregulating MMP-9 gene expression in an Lrp1-dependent manner. Lrp1 expression is increased upon ischemic stroke, and treatment with RAP or antibodies against Lrp1 decreases the degree of tissue edema after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Vasocontraction of smooth muscle cells is facilitated by tPA and requires a functional interaction between Lrp1 and α and β integrins. Astrocytic Lrp1 and tPA have been directly shown to regulate BBB permeability. Improper tPA-Lrp1 and tPA-Mac-1-Lrp1-PDGFR α interactions at the BBB are known to influence the permeability of the neurovascular unit in relation to seizures and ischemia.

In the CNS, tPA is synthesized and released by various cell types including neurons and astrocytes. The majority of neuronal tPA is present in dendrites and axons and is released following depolarization of presynaptic terminals. tPA liberation impacts the release of glutamate, thereby exerting a modulatory function on synaptic activity. Simultaneously, tPA release is proposed to exhibit an independent, homeostatic effect on the cortical glutamatergic postsynapse, which is dependent on the degree of neuronal activation and extracellular Ca2+ concentrations.

The tPA interacts with proteins and receptors located at the synapse, among them Lrp1 and NMDAR. Both single- and two-chain tPA at low concentrations can activate neuronal EGF receptors, which decrease NMDAR signaling and result in neurotrophic effects. High concentrations of single-chain tPA lead to neurotoxic effects by activating NMDAR signaling. Neuronal survival is enhanced via astrocytic TGF-α induction of PAI-1. PAI-1 inhibits tPA and thereby prevents NMDAR-mediated neurotoxicity. Additionally, tPA exerts neuroprotective effects by activating the annexin II and mTOR pathways.

The interaction of tPA with Lrp1 is vital for the generation of hippocampal late LTP and enhancement of PKA activity.

The tPA is tightly connected with LTP induction and synaptic signaling also by its ability to degrade the ECM. TPA-mediated proteolytic cleavage of plasminogen results in the generation of plasmin that enhances the NMDAR-mediated increase in Ca2+ influx upon glutamate application to cultured hippocampal neurons. TPA and plasmin have also been shown to convert pro brain-derived neurotrophic factor to mature brain-derived neurotrophic factor, a protein critical for LTP generation.

Healthy astrocytes possess the ability to uptake tPA, via Lrp1, from the synaptic cleft and modulate the efficacy of synaptic responses. Meanwhile, in vitro cultured astrocytes with reduced Lrp1 levels do not uptake neuron-derived tPA efficiently and as a result cause elevated levels of tPA in the synaptic cleft. Astrocytic Lrp1 uptake of tPA is thereby crucial in preventing surplus tPA-mediated activation of NMDARs and neuronal cell death and is a promising target for epilepsy research.

The tPA is an immediate early gene expressed not only upon LTP but also early after seizures. The exact impact of tPA on seizure generation and epilepsy progression is, however, complex. TPA-deficient mice are resistant to excitotoxin-induced neuronal death, but mice overexpressing tPA in adult neurons do not show neurodegeneration, only a selective enhancement of hippocampal LTP and memory. Involvement of tPA in activity-dependent synaptic plasticity has also been hypothesized to occur in the cerebellum upon motor learning. Here, tPA secreted at either Purkinje cell dendrites or granule neurons and parallel fibers, could eliminate synapses by degrading cell surface receptors and adhesion molecules, or facilitate new synapse formation by degrading the ECM.

Lrp1 and the extracellular protease tPA impact cell migration, adhesion and NMDAR-mediated signaling. TPA exerts its effects not only via its proteolytic activity but also via activating signaling cascades. Interactions of Lrp1 with tPA have been shown so far to depend on the animal age, the cell type, the exact co-factors available, the extracellular/intracellular tPA ratio and the form of tPA. These myriad parameters need consideration when studying the intriguing relationship between Lrp1 and tPA and partially explains contradictory findings in the literature regarding the function of this ECM protein.

Conclusion

Lrp1 is a potent modulator of ECM function in the CNS and beyond. Lrp1 can impact on the composition of the cell plasma membrane, and thereby the ECM, by the endocytosis of a wide range of ECM proteins and protein complexes. ECM molecules themselves can facilitate Lrp1-mediated endocytosis by acting as bridging and docking molecules, as do surface-bound HSPGs. By mediating the endocytosis of a wide range of proteases and protease inhibitors, Lrp1 directly impacts ECM composition. By associating with scaffolding and adaptor proteins and forming co-receptor complexes, Lrp1 appears vital for cell signaling events and activation of many downstream signaling cascades that lead to, among others, ECM remodeling. In this context, the interactions of Lrp1 with its ligands, especially tPA and integrins, have proven critical for normal development, synaptic signaling, cell adhesion and migration. Therefore, it is not surprising that changes in Lrp1 expression and phosphorylation status are associated with neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases and cancer.

A general overview of how Lrp1 can interact with the ECM is depicted in Figure 12.

Lrp1 impact on the ECM is complex. Lrp1 can undergo β- and γ-secretase-mediated cleavages that result in two functional receptor domains that exhibit different properties (1). The shed extracellular domain of Lrp1 can interact with ligands located in the matrix and in the circulation (2). The intracellular Lrp1 domain can translocate to the nucleus and regulate the expression of many genes (3). Lrp1 has been reported to interact with more than 40 different molecules, among them matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and protease inhibitors, thrombospondins, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDAR) and integrins (4). Mirroring this multitude, the binding of ligands to Lrp1 can lead to various effects. Ligands can directly bind to the extracellular domain of Lrp1, undergo endocytosis (5) and be transported to lysosomes/proteasomes for degradation (7) while Lrp1 is recycled back to the membrane (6). Some ligands require bridging molecules like thrombospondins or heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) to undergo efficient uptake (5). Upon ligand binding to the extracellular and/or cytoplasmic domains of Lrp1, the receptor can become phosphorylated (8), result in the activation of signaling cascades (9) and/or regulate gene transcription (10). Given the above, Lrp1 impacts the ECM either directly or indirectly and influences its remodeling. Lrp1 signaling alters not only the composition of the ECM but also other homeostatic processes like synaptic signaling and angiogenesis, which impact brain functioning.

In summary, as the impact of Lrp1 on the ECM is complex and both cell type- and cofactor-dependent, an integrative approach for deciphering Lrp1 function should be implemented for each studied interaction and system.

Author’s Note

Parts of the review content (especially Figure 1, 10, 11 and the integrin and tPA sections) first appeared in the dissertation thesis. This is the only form in which this content has appeared, is in line with the author’s university policy and will be soon available online.

Author Contributions

EB and AF discussed the concept and content of the review. EB drafted and wrote the manuscript and designed the figures, AF read and revised the manuscript. Both authors agreed to the submitted version.

Conflict of Interest Statement

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer DL declared a shared affiliation, with no collaboration, with the authors to the handling Editor at the time of review.

Funding. This work was supported by a graduate training grant of the International Graduate School for Neuroscience (IGSN) to EB. Grant support by the German Research Foundation (DFG, SPP 1757, Fa 159-20-1 & 2) to AF is gratefully acknowledged. We acknowledge support by the DFG Open Access Publication Funds of the Ruhr-Universität Bochum.

References

Tissue plasminogen activator contributes to alterations of neuronal migration and activity-dependent responses in fragile X mice.

Tissue transglutaminase is an integrin-binding adhesion coreceptor for fibronectin.

LRP and alphavbeta3 mediate tPA activation of smooth muscle cells.

Lipoprotein receptors in Alzheimer’s disease.

The human alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor: identification of a 420-kD cell surface glycoprotein specific for the activated conformation of alpha 2-macroglobulin.

Low density lipoprotein-receptor related protein 1 is differentially expressed by neuronal and glial populations in the developing and mature mouse central nervous system.

The endocytic receptor protein LRP also mediates neuronal calcium signalling via N -methyl-D-aspartate receptors.

Distinct components of spatial learning revealed by prior training and NMDA receptor blockade.

Tissue plasminogen activator contributes to the late phase of LTP and to synaptic growth in the hippocampal mossy fiber pathway.

Thrombospondin-1-induced focal adhesion disassembly in fibroblasts requires Thy-1 surface expression, lipid raft integrity, and Src activation.

Collagenase-3 binds to a specific receptor and requires the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein for internalization.

Tyrosine-phosphorylated low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) associates with the adaptor protein SHC in SRC-transformed cells.

CD91 is a common receptor for heat shock proteins gp96, hsp90, hsp70, and calreticulin.

Thrombospondin type 1 repeats interact with matrix metalloproteinase 2. Regulation of metalloproteinase activity.

Lipoprotein lipase enhances the binding of chylomicrons to low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

The LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP, is an apolipoprotein E-binding protein.

Variant glycosylation: an underappreciated regulatory mechanism for beta1 integrins.

Beta1 integrins in radial glia but not in migrating neurons are essential for the formation of cell layers in the cerebral cortex.

Beta1 integrins control the formation of cell chains in the adult rostral migratory stream.

Anti-NR1 N-terminal-domain vaccination unmasks the crucial action of tPA on NMDA- receptor-mediated toxicity and spatial memory.

Conformations of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) orchestrate neuronal survival by a crosstalk between EGFR and NMDAR.

Structural and functional consequences of tyrosine phosphorylation in the LRP1 cytoplasmic domain.

Proteomic analysis of src family kinases signaling complexes in golgi/endosomal fractions using a site-selective anti-phosphotyrosine antibody:identification of lrp1-insulin receptor complexes.

LRP: role in vascular wall integrity and protection from atherosclerosis.

Signaling through LRP1, protection from atherosclerosis and beyond.

Platelet-derived growth factor mediates tyrosine phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in caveolae.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein functions as an endocytic receptor for decorin.

Astrocytes regulate the balance between plasminogen activation and plasmin clearance via cell-surface actin.

Matrix metalloproteinases: a tail of a frog that became a prince.

Extracellular matrix regulates the amount of the β-amyloid precursor protein and its amyloidogenic fragments.

β1-integrin restricts astrocytic differentiation of adult hippocampal neural stem cells.

Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes.

Structure and function of sphingolipid-and-cholesterol-rich membrane rafts.

Expression and function of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) in mammalian central neurons.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor is an hepatic receptor for tissue-type plasminogen activator.

Endocytic receptor LRP together with tPA and PAI-1 coordinates Mac-1-dependent macrophage migration.

LRP1 mediates Hedgehog-induced endocytosis of the GPC3-Hedgehog complex.

Glypican-3 inhibits Hedgehog signaling during development by competing with patched for Hedgehog binding.

The mouse tissue plasminogen activator gene 5’ flanking region directs appropriate expression in development and a seizure-enhanced response in the CNS.

Perineuronal nets suppress plasticity of excitatory synapses on ca2 pyramidal neurons.

Glutamate controls tPA recycling by astrocytes, which in turn influences glutamatergic signals.

A conjugate between human urokinase and saporin, a type 1 ribosome-inactivating protein, is selectively cytotoxic in urokinase receptor-expressing cells.

Targeting of cytotoxic conjugates to Kaposi’s sarcoma-derived cells.

Alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor mediates binding and cytotoxicity of plant ribosome-inactivating proteins.

Trichosanthin interacts with and enters cells via LDL receptor family members.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor binds and mediates catabolism of bovine milk lipoprotein lipase.

Impacts of tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) on neuronal survival.

An overview of APP processing enzymes and products.

Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted proteins that promote CNS synaptogenesis.

Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid amyloid-beta levels in vivo.

Alpha-2 macroglobulin receptor/Ldl receptor-related protein (Lrp)-dependent internalisation of the urokinase receptor.

Protease nexin-1-urokinase complexes are internalized and degraded through a mechanism that requires both urokinase receptor and alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor.

Tissue plasminogen activator prevents white matter damage following stroke.

The LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) regulates the PDGF signaling pathway by binding the protein phosphatase SHP-2 and modulating SHP-2- mediated PDGF signaling events.

Roles of the heparin and low density lipid receptor-related protein-binding sites of protease nexin 1 (PN1) in urokinase-PN1 complex catabolism. The PN1 heparin-binding site mediates complex retention and degradation but not cell surface binding or internalization.

The urokinase/PAI-2 complex: a new high affinity ligand for the endocytosis receptor low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

All three LDL receptors homology regions of the LDL receptor-related protein bind multiple ligands.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 detaches cells from extracellular matrices by inactivating integrins.

Direct binding of occupied urokinase receptor (uPAR) to LDL receptor-related protein is required for endocytosis of uPAR and regulation of cell surface urokinase activity.

PAI-1: an integrator of cell signalling and migration.

Tissue transglutaminase colocalizes with extracellular matrix proteins in cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

Clearance of amyloid-beta peptide across the blood-brain barrier: implication for therapies in Alzheimer’s disease.

apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid beta peptide clearance from mouse brain.

LRP/amyloid beta-peptide interaction mediates differential brain efflux of Abeta isoforms.

Beta-amyloid induces the production of active, matrix-degrading proteases in cultured rat astrocytes.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein is a motogenic receptor for plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.

PAI-1 inhibits urokinase-induced chemotaxis by internalizing the urokinase receptor.

Cathepsin D is partly endocytosed by the LRP1 receptor and inhibits LRP1-regulated intramembrane proteolysis.

Neuron-Glia interactions in neural plasticity: contributions of neural extracellular matrix and perineuronal nets.

PSD-95 is required for activity-driven synapse stabilisation.

PSD-95 involvement in the maturation of excitatory synapses.

Regulation of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity by the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). A new function for an “old friend”.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates endocytic clearance of pro-MMP-2. TIMP-2 complex through a thrombospondin-independent mechanism. .

Plasminogen activator activity is inhibited while neuroserpin is up-regulated in the Alzheimer disease brain.

Contributions of astrocytes to synapse formation and maturation- potential functions of the perisynaptic extracellular matrix.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein contributes to the antiangiogenic activity of thrombospondin-2 in a murine glioma model.

Is tissue-type plasminogen activator a neuromodulator?

Hepatic remnants lipoprotein clearance by heparan sulfate proteoglycans and low-density lipoprotein receptors depend on dietary conditions in mice.

Ultrastructure of the microglia that phagocytose amyloid and the microglia that produce beta-amyloid fibrils.

Tissue plasminogen activator is a potent activator of PDGF-CC.

Identification of a neurovascular signaling pathway regulating seizures in mice.

Tissue plasminogen activator mRNA expression in granule neurons coincides with their migration in the developing cerebellum.

Transforming growth factor alpha-induced expression of type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor in astrocytes rescues neurons from excitotoxicity.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) is a heparin-dependent adhesion receptor for connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in rat activated hepatic stellate cells.

Cell-surface calreticulin initiates clearance of viable or apoptotic cells through trans-activation of LRP on the phagocyte.

LRP1 regulates remodelling of the extracellular matrix by fibroblasts.

Regulation of the composition of the extracellular matrix by low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1: activities based on regulation of mRNA expression.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 is an essential receptor for myelin phagocytosis.

Primary hippocampal neurons, which lack four crucial extracellular matrix molecules, display abnormalities of synaptic structure and function and severe deficits in perineuronal net formation.

β-Amyloid fibrillation and/or hyperhomocysteinemia modify striatal patterns of hyaluronic acid and dermatan sulfate: possible role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimers disease.

Rapid hepatic clearance of full length CCN-2/CTGF: a putative role for LRP1-mediated endocytosis.

Identification of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) as an endocytic receptor for thrombospondin-1.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein: regulation of the plasma membrane proteome.

Impaired LDL receptor-related protein 1 translocation correlates with improved dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis in apoE-deficient mice.

Interactions of the low density lipoprotein receptor gene family with cytosolic adaptor and scaffold proteins suggest diverse biological functions in cellular communication and signal transduction.

Thrombospondin-1 inhibits VEGF levels in the ovary directly by binding and internalization via the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1).

TPA promotes cortical neuron survival via mTOR-dependent mechanisms.

Interactions of the NPXY microdomains of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1.

HtrA1 inhibits mineral deposition by osteoblasts: requirement for the protease and PDZ domains.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein modulates levels of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) by mediating its cellular catabolism.

An endothelial cell receptor for plasminogen/tissue plasminogen activator. I. identity with annexin II.

Wisteria floribunda agglutinin-labelled nets surround parvalbumin-containing neurons.

Apolipoprotein E-containing lipoproteins protect neurons from apoptosis via a signaling pathway involving low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1.

The story of an exceptional serine protease, tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA).

Differential upregulation of extracellular matrix molecules associated with the appearance of granule cell dispersion and mossy fiber sprouting during epileptogenesis in a murine model of temporal lobe epilepsy.

A LewisX glycoprotein screen identifies the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) as a modulator of oligodendrogenesis in mice.

The LDL receptor gene family: (un)expected signal transducers in the brain.

Lipoprotein receptors in the nervous system.

Reelin, lipoprotein receptors and synaptic plasticity.

Expanding functions of lipoprotein receptors.

LDL receptor-related protein internalizes and degrades uPA-PAI-1 complexes and is essential for embryo implantation.

Correction: LDL receptor-related protein internalizes and degrades uPA-PAI-1 complexes and is essential for embryo implantation.

39-kDa protein modulates binding of ligands to low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor.

Surface location and high affinity for calcium of a 500-kd liver membrane protein closely related to the LDL-receptor suggest a physiological role as lipoprotein receptor.

LRP: a multifunctional scavenger and signaling receptor.

Lipid rafts and Alzheimer’s disease: protein-lipid interactions and perturbation of signaling.

Cellular uptake of saposin (SAP) precursor and lysosomal delivery by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP).

Receptor-mediated endocytosis of coagulation factor Xa requires cell surface-bound tissue factor pathway inhibitor.

Members of the low density lipoprotein receptor family mediate cell entry of a minor- group common cold virus.

Improvement of psychotic symptoms and the role of tissue plasminogen activator.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates apolipoprotein E-dependent neurite outgrowth in a central nervous system-derived neuronal cell line.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator promotes murine myofibroblast activation through LDL receptor-related protein 1-mediated integrin signaling.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator acts as a cytokine that triggers intracellular signal transduction and induces matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene expression.

Cellular growth inhibition of IGFBP-3 and TGF-(beta)1 requires LRP-1.

NMR solution structure of complement-like repeat CR8 from the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Mice lacking the gene encoding tissue-type plasminogen activator show a selective interference with late-phase long-term potentiation in both Schaffer collateral and mossy fiber pathways.

The mammalian low-density lipoprotein receptor family.

Epidermal growth factor differentially regulates low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein gene expression in neoplastic and fetal human astrocytes.

Modulatory effect of plasminogen on NMDA-induced increase in intracellular free calcium concentration in rat cultured hippocampal neurons.

Expression and distribution of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mRNA in the rat central nervous system.

Functional role of lipoprotein receptors in Alzheimer’s disease.

Cell surface transglutaminase promotes RhoA activation via integrin clustering and suppression of the Src-p190RhoGAP signaling pathway.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) modulates the postsynaptic response of cerebral cortical neurons to the presynaptic release of glutamate.

Neuronal low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 binds and endocytoses prion fibrils via receptor cluster 4.

Selective inhibition of GluN2D-containing n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors prevents tissue plasminogen activator-promoted neurotoxicity both in vitro and in vivo.

TNF α-induced apoptosis enabled by CCN1/CYR61: pathways of reactive oxygen species generation and Cytochrome C release.

Expression of e. coli of finger-domain lacking tissue-type plasminogen activator with high fibrin activity.

APP processing and synaptic function.

KIF13B enhances the endocytosis of LRP1 by recruiting LRP1 to caveolae.

The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 and amyloid-β clearance in Alzheimer’s disease.

Neuronal clearance of amyloid-ß by endocytic receptor LRP1.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycan and the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 constitute major pathways for neuronal amyloid-beta uptake.

Modulation of amyloid beta-protein clearance and Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility by the LDL receptor-related protein pathway.

Genetic association of the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein gene (LRP), and apolipoprotein E receptor, with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease.

Fibulin-5 binds urokinase-type plasminogen activator and mediates urokinase-stimulated β1-integrin-dependent cell migration.

Specificity of serine proteinase/serpin complex binding to very- low-density lipoprotein receptor and alpha2-macroglobulin receptor/low-density-lipoprotein-receptor-related protein.

The intracellular domain of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein modulates transactivation mediated by amyloid precursor protein and Fe65.

Phosphorylation of LRP1 regulates the interaction with Fe65.

Serpin regulation of factor XIa.

The efficient catabolism of thrombin-protease nexin 1 complexes is a synergistic mechanism that requires both the LDL receptor-related protein and cell surface heparins.

Cell surface APP751 forms complexes with protease nexin 2 ligands and is internalized via the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP).

Selective role of N-type calcium channels in neuronal migration.

Modulation of neuronal migration by NMDA receptors.

The 39-kDa receptor-associated protein interacts with two members of the low density lipoprotein receptor family, alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor and glycoprotein 330.

The cellular internalization and degradation of hepatic lipase is mediated by low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and requires cell surface proteoglycans.

Cellular internalization and degradation of antithrombin III-thrombin, heparin cofactor II-thrombin, and α1-antitrypsin- trypsin complexes is mediated by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor mediates cellular uptake of pro-urokinase.

LDL receptor-related protein, a multifunctional apoE receptor, binds secreted β -amyloid precursor protein and mediates its degradation.

The alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein binds and internalizes Pseudomonas exotoxin A.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates uptake of cholesteryl esters derived from apoprotein E-enriched lipoproteins.

PAI-1 modulates cell migration in a LRP1-dependent manner via β-catenin and ERK1/2.

Characterization of the interaction in vivo of tissue-type plasminogen activator with liver cells.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins in a novel mechanism of axon guidance and peripheral nerve regeneration.

The activities of LDL receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1) compartmentalize into distinct plasma membrane microdomains.

Cellular prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-β oligomers.

The role of microglia in amyloid clearance from the AD brain.

TPA regulates neurite outgrowth by phosphorylation of LRP5/6 in neural progenitor cells.

Midkine prevented hypoxic injury of mouse embryonic stem cells through activation of Akt and HIV-1α via low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1.

MT1-MMP promotes vascular smooth muscle dedifferentiation through LRP1 processing.

Stressed neurons protect themselves by a tissue-type plasminogen activator-mediated EGFR-dependent mechanism.

Differential expression and cell-type specificity of perineuronal nets in hippocampus, medial entorhinal cortex, and visual cortex examined in the rat and mouse.

The light chain of factor VIII comprises a binding site for low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator controls neuronal death by raising surface dynamics of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors.

Endogenous thrombospondin-1 is a cell-surface ligand for regulation of integrin-dependent T-lymphocyte adhesion.

Activation of ERK signaling upon alternative protease nexin-1 internalization mediated by syndecan-1.

Differential functions of members of the low density lipoprotein receptor family suggested by their distinct endocytosis rates.

The YXXL motif, but not the two NPXY motifs, serves as the dominant endocytosis signal for low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Beyond endocytosis: LRP function in cell migration, proliferation and vascular permeability.

LDL receptor-related protein 1: unique tissue-specific functions revealed by selective gene knockout studies.

LRP1 regulates peroxisome biogenesis and cholesterol homeostasis in oligodendrocytes and is required for proper CNS myelin development and repair.

Identification and characterization of the acidic pH binding sites for growth regulatory ligands of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1.

Astrocytic LRP1 mediates brain Aβ clearance and impacts amyloid deposition.

Neuronal LRP1 knockout in adult mice leads to impaired brain lipid metabolism and progressive, age-dependent synapse loss and neurodegeneration.

Amyloid precursor protein regulates brain apolipoprotein E and cholesterol metabolism through lipoprotein receptor LRP1.

Lipoprotein receptor LRP1 regulates leptin signaling and energy homeostasis in the adult central nervous system.

Uptake of HIV-1 tat protein mediated by low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein disrupts the neuronal metabolic balance of the receptor ligands.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) interacts with presenilin 1 and is a competitive substrate of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) for gamma-secretase.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). Evidence for integrated co-receptor function between LRP and the PDGF.

Thrombospondin 1 - a key astrocyte-derived neurogenic factor.

Regulation of Rac1 activation by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Functional occurrence of the interaction of tissue plasminogen activator with the NR1 subunit of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors during stroke.

Enhanced hippocampal long-term potentiation and learning by increased neuronal expression of tissue-type plasminogen activator in transgenic mice.

Atherogenic remnant lipoproteins: role for proteoglycans in trapping, transferring, internalizing.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein modulates protease activity in the brain by mediating the cellular internalization of both neuroserpin and neuroserpin-tissue-type plasminogen activator complexes.

Microglia mediate the clearance of soluble Abeta through fluid phase macropinocytosis.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP1) regulates Rac1 and RhoA reciprocally to control Schwann cell adhesion and migration.

LRP1 assembles unique co-receptor systems to initiate cel signalling in response to tissue-type plasminogen activator and myelin-associated glycoprotein.

The NMDA receptor functions independently and as an LRP1 co-receptor to promote Schwann cell survival and migration.

The functional role of the second NPXY motif of the LRP1 β-chain in tissue-type plasminogen activator-mediated activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.

Expression of alpha(2)- macroglobulin receptor/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) in rat microglial cells.

Molecular mechanisms of lipoprotein receptor signalling.

Proteolytic processing of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates regulated release of its intracellular domain.

Neuronal LRP1 functionally associates with postsynaptic proteins and is required for normal motor function in mice.

Binding and degradation of platelet thrombospondin by cultured fibroblasts.

Functional duplication of ligand-binding domains within low-density lipoprotein receptor-related proten for interaction with receptor associated protein, alpha2-macroglobulin, factor IXa and factor VIII.

Metabolism of activated complement component C3 is mediated by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha(2)-macroglobulin receptor.

Removal of lactoferrin from plasma is mediated by binding to low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/α 2-macroglobulin receptor and transport to endosomes.

The extracellular matrix protein laminin α2 regulates the maturation and function of the blood-brain barrier.

Thrombospondin 2 potentiates notch3/jagged1 signaling.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1) regulates thrombospondin-2 (TSP2) enhancement of Notch3 signaling.

Decorin inhibits cell attachment to thrombospondin-1 by binding to a KKTR-dependent cell adhesive site present within the N-terminal domain of thrombospondin-1.

Biology and biochemistry of proteinases in tumor invasion.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor mediates the cellular internalization and degradation of thrombospondin. A process facilitated by cell-surface proteoglycans.

Cellular internalization and degradation of thrombospondin-1 is mediated by the amino-terminal heparin binding domain (HBD): high affinity interaction of dimeric HBD with the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Binding and receptor-mediated endocytosis of pregnancy zone protein-proteinase complex in rat macrophages.

Evidence that epithelial glycoprotein 330/megalin mediates uptake of polybasic drugs.

Activation of perineuronal net-expressing excitatory neurons during associative memory encoding and retrieval.

LDL-receptor-related protein as a component of the midkine receptor.

LRP1 protects the vasculature by regulating levels of connective tissue growth factor and HtrA1.

Macrophage LRP1 supresses neo-intima formation during vascular remodeling by modulating the TGF-β signaling pathway.

Heparin-binding peptides from thrombospondins 1 and 2 contain focal adhesion-labilizing activity.

The lipoprotein receptor LRP1 modulates sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling and is essential for vascular development.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) modulates N-methyl-D-aspartate (n.d.) receptor-dependent intracellular signaling and NMDA-induced regulation of postsynaptic protein complexes.

LRP promotes endocytosis and degradation, but not transcytosis, of the amyloid-β peptide in a blood-brain barrier in vitro model.

The second and fourth cluster of class A cysteine-rich repeats of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein share ligand-binding properties.

Cleavage of the NR2B subunit amino terminus of N-methyl-D-aspartate (n.d.) receptor by tissue plasminogen activator: identification of the cleavage site and characterization of ifenprodil and glycine affinities on truncated NMDA receptor.

The proteolytic activity of tissue-plasminogen activator enhances NMDA receptor-mediated signaling.

T-PA-specific modulation of a human blood-brain barrier model involves plasmin-mediated activation of the Rho kinase pathway in astrocytes.

Recycling of the urokinase receptor upon internalization of the uPA:serpin complexes.

Regions involved in binding of urokinase-type-1 inhibitor complex and pro-urokinase to the endocytic alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor/low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein. Evidence that the urokinase receptor protects pro-urokinase against binding to the endocytic receptor.

Purified alpha 2- macroglobulin receptor/LDL receptor-related protein binds urokinase plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 complex. Evidence that the alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor mediates cellular degradation of urokinase receptor-bound complexes.

GluN2D subunit-containing NMDA receptors control tissue plasminogen activator-mediated spatial memory.

Contrasting effects of plasminogen activators, urokinase receptor, LDL receptor-related protein on smooth muscle cell migration and invasion.

Thrombospondin signaling through the calreticulin/LDL receptor-related protein co-complex stimulates random and directed cell migration.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein is a calreticulin coreceptor that signals focal adhesion disassembly.

Thrombospondin stimulates focal adhesion disassembly through Gi- and phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent ERK activation.

Thrombospondin induces RhoA inactivation through FAK-dependent signaling to stimulate focal adhesion disassembly.

Complexes of tissue-type plasminogen activator and its serpin inhibitor plasminogen-activator inhibitor type 1 are internalized by means of the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor.

β1-integrin and integrin linked kinase regulate astroctic differentiation of neural stem cells.

Research advances on structure and biological functions of integrins.

Regulation of late-phase LTP and long-term memory in normal and aging hippocampus: role of secreted proteins tPA and BDNF.

Cleavage of proBDNF by tPA/plasmin is essential for long-term hippocampal plasticity.

Unveiling an exceptional zymogen: the single-chain form of tPA is a selective activator of NMDA receptor-dependent signaling and neurotoxicity.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator controlled corticogenesis through a mechanism dependent of NMDA receptors expressed on radial glial cells.

Ethanol-withdrawal seizures are controlled by tissue plasminogen activator via modulation of NR2B-containing NMDA receptors.

LRP1 mediates bidirectional transcytosis of amyloid-β across the blood-brain barrier.

LRP1-dependent endocytic mechanism governs the signaling output of the bmp system in endothelial cells and in angiogenesis.

The cytoplasmic domain of the LDL receptor-related protein regulates multiple steps in APP processing.

FE65 constitutes the functional link between the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and the amyloid precursor protein.

Neural ECM and epilepsy.

Severe hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice created by homologous recombination in ES cells.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator-mediated shedding of astrocytic low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein increases the permeability of the neurovascular unit.

Differential recognition of alpha 1-antitrypsin-elastase and alpha 1-antichymotrypsin-cathepsin G complexes by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans regulate astrocyte-dependent synaptogenesis and modulate synaptic activity in primary embryonic hippocampal neurons.

Tissue-plasminogen activator is induced as an immediate-early gene during seizure, kindling and long-term potentiation.

Apolipoprotein E receptors mediate neurite outgrowth through activation of p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase in primary neurons.

Alpha 2-macroglobulin exposure reduces calcium responses to N -methyl-D-aspartate via low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in cultured hippocampal neurons.

Alpha2-macroglogulin enhances the clearance of endogeneous soluble beta-amyloid-peptide via low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in cortical neurons.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 mediated endocytosis of β1-integrin influences cell adhesion and cell migration.

Impaired vascular-mediated clearance of brain amyloid beta in Alzheimer’s disease: the role, regulation and restoration of LRP1.

Macrophage LRP1 contributes to the clearance of von Willebrand factor.

Multiple, diverse senile plaque-associated proteins are ligands of an apolipoproteinE receptor, the alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor/low-density-lipoprotein receptor related protein.

Inactivation of the proximal NPXY motif impairs early steps in LRP1 biosynthesis.

β1-Integrin cytoskeletal signaling regulates sensory neuron response to matrix dimensionality.

Reactive astrogliosis causes the development of spontaneous seizures.

Conditional deletion of β1-integrin in astroglia causes partial reactive gliosis.

Tissue plasminogen activator inhibits NMDA-receptor-mediated increases in calcium levels in cultured hippocampal neurons.

Mutant Lrp1 knock-in mice generated by recombinase- mediated cassette exchange reveal differential importance of the NPXY motifs in the intracellular domain of LRP1 for normal fetal development.

Inducible inactivation of hepatic LRP gene by cre-mediated recombination confirms role of LRP in clearance of chylomicron remnants.

The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein LRP is regulated by membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) proteolysis in malignant cells.

Prion protein-mediated toxicity of amyloid-β oligomers requires lipid rafts and the transmembrane LRP1.

Tumor cell traffic through the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membrane-anchored collagenase MT1-MMP.

Protease-dependent versus -independent cancer cell invasion programs: three-dimensional amoeboid movement revisited.

Role of the low density lipoprotein-related protein receptor inmediation of factor VIII catabolism.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 is a novel modulator of radial glia stem cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation.

Clearance of amyloid-beta by circulating lipoprotein receptors.

Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice.

Reduced hippocampal LTP and spatial learning in mice lacking NMDA receptor epsilon 1 subunit.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 promotes beta1 integrin maturation and transport to the cell surface.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates fibronectin catabolism and inhibits fibronectin accumulation on cell surfaces.

The multimerization state of the amyloid-β42 (Aβ 42) peptide governs its interaction network with the extracellular matrix.

Pregnancy zone protein-tissue-type plasminogen activator complexes bind to low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP).

Extracellular proteolysis in the adult murine brain.

Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans participate in factor VIII catabolism mediated by low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

LRP1 is a receptor for Clostridium perfringens TpeL toxin indicating a two-receptor model of clostridial glycosylating toxins.

Notch1 and Notch2 receptors influence progressive hair graying in a dose-dependent manner.

Differential regulation of extracellular tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-3 levels by cell membrane-bound and shed low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1.

Dissecting the interaction between tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-3 (TIMP-3) and low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1): development of a “TRAP” to increase levels of TIMP-3 in the tissue.

Neuronal migration is retarded in mice lacking the tissue plasminogen activator gene.

Plasminogen activators and their interaction with the extracellular matrix in neural development, plasticity and regeneration.

Tissue plasminogen activator induction in Purkinje neurons after cerebellar motor learning.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein/alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor is a receptor for connective tissue growth factor.

Toward a comprehensive theory for Alzheimer’s disease. Hypothesis: alzheimer’s disease is caused by the cerebral accumulation and cytotoxicity of amyloid beta-protein.

Dual interaction of the malaria circumsporozoite protein with the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) and heparan sulfate proteoglycans.

Clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β1-40 peptide from brain by LDL receptor-related protein-1 at the blood-brain barrier.

Role of LRP1 in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: evidence from clinical and preclinical studies.

Lipid rafts and signal transduction.

Crosstalk between glia, extracellular matrix and neurons.

Cellular uptake of C4b-binding protein is mediated by heparan sulfate proteoglycans and CD91/LDL receptor-related protein.

LDL-receptor-related protein regulates β 2-integrin-mediated leukocyte adhesion.

The intersection of amyloid beta and tau at synapses in Alzheimer’s disease.

Interaction of alpha9beta1 integrin with thrombospondin-1 promotes angiogenesis.

tPA deficiency in mice leads to rearrangement in the cerebrovascular tree and cerebroventricular malformations.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and vitronectin promote the cellular clearance of thrombin by low density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins 1 and 2.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 contains a cryptic high affinity binding site for the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

LDL receptor-related protein-1 is a sialic-acid-independent receptor for myelin-associated glycoprotein that functions in neurite outgrowth inhibition by MAG and CNS myelin.

C1 inhibitor-C1s complexes are internalized and degraded by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein.

Sequence identity between the alpha 2-macroglobulin receptor and low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein suggests that this molecule is a multifunctional receptor.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1: Role in the regulation of vascular integrity.

Diverse roles for the LDL receptor family.

Activation of PDGF-CC by tissue plasminogen activator impairs blood-brain barrier integrity during ischemic stroke.

An AXL/LRP-1/RANBP9 complex mediates DC efferocytosis and antigen cross-presentation in vivo.

The mechanism of internalization of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored prion protein.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates apolipoprotein E inhibition of smooth muscle cell migration.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) controls endocytosis and c-CBL- mediated ubiquitination of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFR beta).

Regulation of T-lymphocyte motility, adhesion and de-adhesion by a cell surface mechanism directed by low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 and endogenous thrombospondin-1.

Tissue plasminogen activator does not alter development of acquired epilepsy.

The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) mediates the endocytosis of the cellular prion protein.

Identification of LRP-1 as an endocytosis and recycling receptor for β1-integrin in thyroid cancer cells.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 mediates endocytic clearance of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 and promotes its cytokine-like activities.

Interaction of cytosolic adaptor proteins with neuronal apolipoprotein E receptors and the amyloid precursor protein.

Extracellular proteolysis of reelin by tissue plasminogen activator following synaptic potentiation.

Extracellular heat shock protein 90 signals through subdomain II and the NPVY motif of LRP-1 receptor to Akt1 and Akt2: a circuit essential for promoting skin cell migration in vitro and wound healing in vivo.

Excitotoxin-induced neuronal degeneration and seizure are mediated by tissue plasminogen activator.

Complexation of fibronectin with tissue transglutaminase.

Modulation of beta-amyloid precursor protein processing by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). Evidence that LRP contributes to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease.

Protease nexin 1 and its receptor LRP modulate SHH signalling during cerebellar development.

The matricellular receptor LRP1 forms and interface for signaling and endocytosis in modulation of the extracellular tumor environment.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans in Alzheimer’s disease and amyloid-related disorders.

Astrocytic β1-integrin affects cellular composition of murine blood brain barrier in the cerebral cortex.

Overexpression of HTRA1 leads to ultrastructural changes in the elastic layer of Bruch’s membrane via cleavage of extracellular matrix components.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) is a novel beta-secretase (BACE1) substrate.

The role of low-density receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) as a competitive substrate of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) for BACE1.

Mammalian heparanase: what is the message?

Cellular uptake of mammalian heparanase precursor involves low density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins, mannose 6-phosphate receptors and heparan sulfate proteoglycans.

LRP1 modulates APP trafficking along early compartments of the secretory pathway.

Internalization but not binding of thrombospondin-1 to low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 requires heparan sulfate proteoglycans.

Hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells directly contribute to arteriosclerotic progression via integrin β2.

Lipoprotein receptor-mediated induction of matrix metalloproteinase by tissue plasminogen activator.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates the cellular degradation of tissue factor pathway inhibitor.

Embryonic fibroblasts that are genetically deficient in low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein demonstrate increased activity of the urokinase receptor system and accelerated migration on vitronectin.

Epidermal growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor-BB induce a stable increase in the activity of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein in vascular smooth muscle cells by altering receptor distribution and recycling.

Endogenous activiation of latent collagenase by rheumatoid synovial cells. Evidence for a role of plasminogen activator.

Signal transduction through the fibronectin receptor induces collagenase and stromelysin expression.

The migration of human smooth muscle cells in vitro is mediated by plasminogen activation and can be inhibited by alpha2-macroglobulin receptor associated protein.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein and gp330 bind similar ligands, including plasminogen activator-inhibitor complexes and lactoferrin, an inhibitor of chylomicron remnant clearance.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein complexes with cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan-mediated lipoprotein catabolism.

Pivotal role of the RanBP9-cofilin pathway in Abeta-induced apoptosis and neurodegeneration.

Pivotal role of RanBP9 in integrin-dependent focal adhesion signaling and assembly.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator triggers the synaptic vesicle cycle in cerebral cortical neurons.

The low-density lipoprotein-related protein-1 associates transiently with lipid rafts.

The tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)/plasmin extracellular proteolytic system regulates seizure-induced hippocampal mossy fiber outgrowth through a proteoglycan substrate.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 couples β1 integrin activation to degradation.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 mediates uptake of amyloid β peptides in an in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier cells.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1)-mediated endocytic clearance of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs-4 (ADAMTS-4): functional differences of non-catalytic domains of ADAMTS-4 and ADAMTS-5 in LRP1 binding.

Fibulin-5 is an elastin-binding protein essential for elastic fibre development in vivo.

Apolipoprotein E promotes the binding and uptake of beta-amyloid into Chinese hamster ovary cells in an isoform-specific manner.

Extracellular matrix metalloproteinase 2 levels are regulated by the low density lipoprotein-related scavenger receptor and thrombospondin 2.

Neuroserpin: a selective inhibitor of tissue-type plasminogen activator in the central nervous system.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator induces opening of the blood-brain barrier via the LDL receptor-related protein.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator induces synaptic vesicle endocytosis in cerebral cortical neurons.

Matrix metalloproteinases expressed by astrocytes mediate extracellular amyloid-beta peptide catabolism.

Endocytic pathways mediating oligomeric Aβ42 neurotoxicity.

The serine protease plasmin cleaves the amino-terminal domain of the NR2A subunit to relieve zinc inhibition of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.

Cell-surface transglutaminase undergoes internalization and lysosomal degradation: an essential role for LRP1.

Microglial low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 mediates the effect of tissue-type plasminogen activator on matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity in the ischemic brain.

Localization of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 to caveolae in 3T3-L1 adipocytes in response to insulin treatment.

Diet-induced atherosclerosis in mice heterozygous and homozygous for apolipoprotein E gene disruption.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator and the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediate cerebral ischemia-induced nuclear factor-kappaB pathway activation.

LRP1 regulates architecture of the vascular wall by controlling PDGFRβ -dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation.

Apolipoprotein E binding to low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 inhibits cell migration via activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.

Role of tissue plasminogen activator receptor LRP in hippocampal long-term potentiation.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-1, LRP1, interacts with the human frizzled-1 (HFz1) and down-regulates the canonical Wnt signaling pathway.

Gamma-secretase limits the inflammatory response through the processing of LRP1.